ENCAPSULATION OF MICROORGANISMS FOR THEIR USE IN WASTEWATER TREATMENT
Raúl Fernández Díaz, Pablo Fernández García & Silvia González López - Group 2 Contact: UO263619@uniovi.es
Deliverable 3
Abstract
Nitrate contamination is both an environmental and human health hazard that must be properly managed. The most convenient strategy for nitrate removal is biological denitrification with active sludges. So, we attempted to improve their characteristics through encapsulation.
To monitor nitrate evolution, we developed and validated a robust spectrophotometric method specifically designed to handle complex samples with salts and organic matter. The kinetics of the reaction were adjusted to 0, 1st, and 2nd pseudo-orders, and we achieved better adjustment with pseudo-first order. Free sludge showed faster and more complete denitrification, with 97 % nitrate removal, whilst encapsulated sludge demonstrated slower rates and incomplete denitrification (70 - 75 %). We attempted to verify the presence of denitrifying bacteria through amplification of nirK gene, albeit results were inconclusive, which may be due to the primers used or to the lack of this gene in the microbial populations; nevertheless, the fact that denitrification was achieved proves the presence of denitrifying microorganisms. Furthermore, samples were dyed to mark viable and non-viable cells, and then observed by confocal laser scanning microscopy; results showed no significant difference in the viability of encapsulated sludge when compared to free sludge before and after denitrification.
Therefore, in this context, encapsulation seems a counterproductive technique as it slows reaction rates, diminishes the total denitrification achieved, and does not provide any significant protection for the microorganisms. These results, however, are the product of analysing a small set of data and would require further replication before we can establish any solid conclusions on the matter.

Index
1. Introduction	2
1.1. Nitrate contamination	2
1.2. Biological denitrification	2
1.3. Encapsulation	4
1.4. Analytical determination of nitrates	4
2. Materials and methods	5
2.1. Encapsulation and denitrification process	5
2.2. Analysis of nitrate concentration	6
2.3. Denitrification kinetics modelization	6
2.4. Microbiological assays	6
3. Results and discussion	7
3.1. Sludge characterization	7
3.2. Validation of the analytical method	8
3.3. Monitoring of the denitrification process	9
3.4. Denitrification kinetics modelization	10
3.5. Microbiological studies	15
3.5.1. Microbial characterization	15
3.5.2. Viability and morphological assay	16
4. Conclusions	20
5. References	21
6. Annexes	25
Annex I: Protocol for DNA extraction	25
Annex II: Protocol for the PCR	26

1. Introduction
1.1. Nitrate contamination
Since the development of the Haber-Bosch method in the 1920s, ammonia depositions have been increasing steadily in land and water as manufacturing fertilizers became easier and cheaper. Indeed, around half of all the nitrogen used in agriculture ends up contaminating both superficial and groundwaters, increasing nitrate concentrations within both media (Power & Schepers, 1989; Ward et al., 2018). There are other factors, however, that may have also contributed to the destabilisation of the nitrogen cycle, like the spill of wastewaters rich in ammonia from industries and municipalities (Power & Schepers, 1989) or the replacement of indigenous flora for nitrogen-fixing crops like soybeans (Vitousek et al., 1997). 
The augmented concentration of nitrogen in an aquatic ecosystem causes eutrophication. Eutrophication leads to the bloom of algae and cyanobacteria, which produce toxins as secondary products of their metabolisms (Dodds et al., 2009; Paerl, 1988). The presence of toxins, in turn, kills many organisms, which accumulate as biomass in the environment. Biomass constitutes an easy source of energy so many heterotrophic microorganisms will start oxidizing it aerobically, and that becomes an issue. Oxygen is present only in low concentrations in water (under 10 ppm), so, if enough microorganisms start decomposing biomass aerobically, they will consume the oxygen faster than it can be replaced, creating hypoxic microenvironments where only anaerobic organisms can survive (Arend et al., 2011); thus transforming completely the original ecosystem from aerobic to anaerobic and eliminating most of the autochthonous species.
Another consequence of increased nitrate concentration, now in soils, is the prevalence of nitrates in vegetables, which can lead to the formation of N-nitroso compounds through endogenous nitrosation. This is particularly worrisome as N-nitroso compounds are known carcinogens and teratogens (IARC, 2010). Furthermore, the intake of nitrate itself can directly cause human diseases such as methemoglobinemia, thyroid disorders, or lead to adverse pregnancy outcomes (Ward et al., 2018).
1.2. Biological denitrification
Handling appropriately nitrate contamination is, therefore, of the utmost importance for preserving both ecological integrity and human health. Thus, it is fortunate that there are many different technologies that we can implement for its removal, namely, a) reduction by zero-valent iron, b) ion exchange processes, c) adsorption-based processes, d) reverse osmosis, and e) biological denitrification. Among them, biological denitrification is the most common for wastewater treatment (Huno et al., 2018). 
Biological denitrification takes advantage of the metabolic machinery within certain microorganisms to reduce nitrate into nitrogen gas. In fact, it is interesting to consider how, functionally, biological denitrification is a multi-step process that works as a complex combination of all the other techniques: physical adsorption with bacterial walls and cellular membranes, ion exchange with superficial receptors, nitrate mobilisation through a semipermeable membrane against its electrochemical gradient, and several concatenated reductions (cf. Equation 1).
 Fortunately, designing a reactor for biological denitrification does not require a comprehensive modelisation of all the underlying mechanisms, as they are already integrated within the living microorganisms. We can, therefore, conceptualise them as simple reagents that we add onto the medium, where they will grow consuming nitrate. This convenience is the core reason why they are so widely used as i) they can be easily removed by sedimentation; ii) do not introduce foreign salts or ions - in contrast to ion exchange or iron reduction; iii) can work with continuous flow, whereas adsorption-based processes cannot; and iv) are more energy efficient than reverse osmosis as they do not require significant energy inputs, only a gentle agitation (Díaz, 2015; Huno et al., 2018).
Equation 1. Concatenated reductions present in the process of biological denitrification.
NO3- → (nitrate reductase) NO2- → (nitrite reductase) NO → (nitric oxide reductase) N2O → (nitrous oxide reductase) N2
There is a wide array of microorganisms with the ability to perform any single step of the denitrification, but not so many that are able to complete the whole process by themselves. This means that we have to use either a particular strain with very specific nutritional requirements or a culture composed of different microorganisms cooperating synergistically to achieve effective nitrate removal. These cultures are often referred to as active sludge within engineering contexts for their particular colour, texture, and odor. Using active sludges presents significant advantages, chiefly, there is no need for creating a selecting environment to prevent colonisation. Furthermore, the diversity and specialisation within active sludge provides a resilience and efficacy to the method that we could not expect otherwise. Though, on the other hand, their heterogeneity and the inherent indeterminacy within their populations can hamper the reproducibility of the results and the analysis of inner ecological relations. 
We can discern the appropriateness of a certain active sludge by verifying the presence of the sequences encoding enzymes involved in crucial steps of the denitrification pathway (cf. Equation 1). Particularly, the reduction from NO2- to NO allows for the distinction between nitrate-respiring and denitrifying microbes. The enzymes that catalyse this reaction receive, collectively, the name of nitrite reductases and can be classified into two types, i) cytochrome cd1 enzymes encoded by nirS, or ii) copper-containing enzymes encoded by nirK. Another step that may provide with further verification of the denitrifying properties of an active sludge is the reduction of N2O, the last step of the whole process, which is catalysed by a nitrous oxide reductase encoded by the nosZ gene (Throbäck, 2004).
1.3. Encapsulation
Although biological denitrification is the simplest, most effective nitrate removal strategy, it is not perfect. One of its major disadvantages comes from its biological nature, cells are fragile. There are many factors that may either kill them or slow their growth: changes in pH, temperature, or the shear forces that arise from mechanical agitation. Working with active sludges mitigates their impact as the sludges have diverse populations and have been adapted to growing at ambient temperature, so, provided that they are kept within a reasonable range (10 - 30 ºC) (Diaz, 2015; Lin & Gu, 2020), there will be no need for monitoring their temperature; nor would they require a strict control over pH, as they are able to resist within a relatively wide window (pH 6 - 8.5) (Díaz, 2015). It is, however, necessary to set properly the agitation, so as to minimize the damage dealt to the microorganisms while ensuring medium homogeneity.
Moreover, we can improve the mechanical strength of the active sludges by immobilising them. There are many types of immobilisation, but we are going to focus on encapsulation. Encapsulation is a specific type of immobilisation that envelops the cells with a protective, semipermeable membrane. The immobilised cells retain some measure of movement within the confines of the membrane, which facilitates their growth and reduces the risk of autoinhibition. Furthermore, the protective barrier that is created improves microbial endurance against changes in pH, temperature, mechanical agitation and even to slight concentrations of toxic substances (Bouabidi et al., 2018; Kadimpati et al, 2013).  
There are many different techniques that can be implemented for the encapsulation, which can be categorized into three groups: physical, chemical and physicochemical techniques. 
Physical techniques include spray drying, fluidized bed, and extrusion (Deaker et al., 2004; Picot & Lacroix, 2003; Watanabe et al., 2002; Wampler, 1992); the most remarkable chemical techniques are molecular inclusion and interfacial polymerization (Reineccius et al., 2002; Yeo et al., 2001); and, finally, physicochemical processes include ionic gelation, (Sheu & Marshall, 1993), and inverse gelation (Sasaki et al., 2008). 
In ionic gelation, drops of a suspension containing the microorganisms and sodium alginate are dripped into a calcium chloride solution, where they polymerize to form the capsules (She & Marshall, 1993). This method combines a simple set-up with a gentle treatment that prevents damaging the sludges, making it a fitting option for immobilizing denitrifying active sludges.
1.4. Analytical determination of nitrates
Finally, as important as removing the contamination from the environment may be, determining whether there is contamination is just as crucial, perhaps even more. Nitrate contamination is a widespread problem and, as such, there is an extensive literature covering different measuring strategies. 
Potentiometry with nitrate ion selective electrodes is one of the most widely used methods; although, the presence of other anions like chloride, bromide, nitrite and sulphate can interfere with the measurements. Besides, this method requires great volumes of sample in order to submerge the electrodes. Another option, then, would be reduction to ammonia followed by steam distillation, which is not commonly used due to the amount of time and reactants that it demands (Akhtar et al, 2011). Ion chromatography could also be used. But, this method, though very precise, requires a high economical investment, and is vulnerable against complex matrices with high ionic strength or organic matter (Gal et al., 2004). Colorimetric assays following reduction by cadmium, cadmium-copper or hydrazine could be another approach; however, hydrazine or heavy metals involve health and environmental hazards, which makes this method inappropriate in the presence of other alternatives.
 The last procedure and the best fit for our purposes is UV spectroscopy. Nitrate ions are characterized by a strong absorbance spectrum between 200 and 220 nm, within the ultraviolet range, which makes it possible to measure their concentration in a spectroscopic assay. However, organic matter, which will inevitably be present in the samples, also strongly absorbs radiation in this spectrum, resulting in interferences. Nevertheless, there are some approaches that can eliminate this interference, such as filtering the sample through an activated carbon filter (Rennie et al., 1979). There is no need, though, to introduce such complex procedures, as simply using the same matrix as solvent for standards and samples may mitigate the interference due to organic matter, improving the accuracy and precision of the method (Skoog et al., 2017).
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Encapsulation and denitrification process
We used an anaerobic batch reactor with a volume of 500 mL. The medium was a solution of various salts to allow appropriate cell growth. Its composition is an adaptation of the media described in Díaz (2015), Lin & Gu (2020), and Seth et al. (2017): 1.20 g/L of K2HPO4, 0.12 g/L of NaOH and 0.05 g/L of MgSO4, KNO3 as synthetic contamination (concentration of NO3- was set at 400 mg/L) and a C/N molar ratio of 2 achieved by adding 0.520 mL of methanol per liter of medium; and, lastly, pH was adjusted to a 7.0 value with a 1 N HCl solution. 
The active sludge comes from a wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) in Baíña. For their encapsulation, 600 mL of active sludge were centrifuged for 5 min at 10,000 rpm and the resultant pellet was dissolved in 50 mL of water solution until all the lumps were completely dissolved; this suspension was added to an alginate solution at 38 ºC and mixed to obtain a 1 % alginate concentration. This alginate-sludge solution was connected to a pump coupled to a set of needles with different diameters depending on the particular experiment (shown in Table 1), which poured their content on a stirred 2.5 % CaCl2 solution. The newly formed capsules were hardened in the CaCl2 solution for 1 - 1.5 hours and subsequently drained and introduced in the bioreactor. 
Table 1. Characteristics of the different needles used in the encapsulation process.
Needle
Inner diameter (mm)
Outer diameter (mm)
Large
1.60
2.11
Medium
1.19
1.65
Small
0.84
1.27


The medium was degasified until oxygen concentration dropped below 2.0 mg/L and subsequently added to the biorreactor to a final volume of 500 mL; pH was adjusted, the reactor was closed to ensure an anaerobic environment, and the magnetic stirring was activated. In the case of the replica with suspended sludge, the procedure included the first step of preconcentration, but the resultant pellet was directly dissolved in the reaction medium and introduced in the reactor.
Samples of medium were collected every thirty minutes or an hour, depending on the experiment, centrifuged, passed through a 0.22 μm filter and stored at 4 ºC. Data on dissolved oxygen, temperature, and pH were also registered in order to control these parameters and, if necessary, for further analysis. Certain samples were assayed on their nitrate concentration by a colorimetric assay (Visocolor, 2020) to follow qualitatively the evolution of the denitrification. Samples of microorganisms were taken at the beginning and at the end of the bioreaction and stored at 4 ºC or - 20 ºC, depending on the following assay (cf. Section 2.4.).
Active sludges were characterized by determining volatile suspended solids: 25 mL of sludge suspension were passed through a filter coupled to vacuum, the filter was then dried at 105 ºC overnight and calcined at 550 ºC; the weights of the filter at the different stages was monitored for further calculations.
2.2. Analysis of nitrate concentration
The determination of nitrates in the filtered samples was achieved through spectrophotometry, measuring their absorbance at 220 nm in a UV/Vis spectrophotometer with quartz cuvettes. For the dilution of samples and standards (ranging from 0.5 to 20 mg/L of nitrate), we used a solution with the same composition as the medium for the bioreactor (cf. Section 2.1.), though without nitrate.
2.3. Denitrification kinetics modelization
We adjusted the denitrification process to pseudo-zero, pseudo-first and pseudo-second order kinetics. These models are often acceptable for describing the behaviour of complex systems within certain ranges, but they tend to fail when trying to explain their whole trajectory (Díaz, 2015). We have linearized the data for each model as follows,
Zero-order: [Nitrate] = -kt + cte
First-order: ln([Nitrate]) = -kt + cte
Second-order:1[Nitrate]=kt +cte 
The linearized data were adjusted to each model with the linear least squares method, and then we decided which of the models adjusted better based on their correlation coefficients. The best model was delinearized and represented alongside the experimental data to illustrate the fidelity of the adjustment. Finally, we represented the percentage of denitrification to provide another perspective on the significance of the results obtained as follows, 
Denitrification percentage at time i = (1-[Nitrate]i[Nitrate]o)100
The adjusted models were also translated into denitrification percentages and represented alongside the experimental data.
2.4. Microbiological assays
Samples of the suspended sludge/capsules taken before and after the denitrification process for their microbiological analysis were subjected to two different assays, 1) PCR of the coding sequence of the nirK gene using specific primers, shown in Table 2, and 2) a viability assay.
For the amplification of the nirK gene, samples were stored at - 20 ºC and a DNA extraction was performed following the phenol:chloroform method (cf. Annex I). Afterwards, a PCR was run using PHUSION DNA polymerase and the thermocycler was configured to follow a touchdown program adapted from Braker et al. (1998) (cf. Annex II). Both the results of the DNA isolation and the amplified fragments from the PCR were analysed through electrophoresis in a 2 % agarose gel with a λ-DNA/PstI Marker.
In the case of the viability assay, samples were stored at 4 ºC and the protocol followed the fluorescent stain procedure with propidium iodide and SYTO 9 dyes described for the LIVE/DEAD BacLight Bacterial Viability Kit (Invitrogen, 2004) on either suspended sludge or carefully sliced capsules; the results were observed by confocal laser scanning microscopy under oil immersion. The observation of the samples required establishing certain parameters, including line average value (equal to 2) and the excitation and emission wavelengths for the different fluorescent dyes: the former were set at 488 and 543 nm for SYTO 9 and propidium iodide, respectively, while the later were settled at ranges from 500 to 534 nm and from 660 to 732 nm, respectively. The resultant images were processed with the program Confocal UnioviImageJ.
Table 2. Information on primers employed for the PCR of nirK gene. Source: Braker et al., 1998
Primers sequences
Primer
Position
Sequence
Forward primer (nirK1F)
526–542
5’ GG(A/C) ATG GT(G/T) CC(C/G) TGG CA 3’
Reverse primer (nirK5R)
1023–1040 
5’ GCC TCG ATC AG(A/G) TT(A/G) TGG 3’
Amplicon length
514 base pairs (bp)


3. Results and discussion
3.1. Sludge characterization
The active sludge used in this study comes from an industrial WWTP, so its characterization was necessary. Sludge characterization is a thorough procedure that determines its behaviour in treatment processes in three main areas: treatability, quality, and quantity (Haugan & Mininni, 1981). In this particular case, we have focused on the latter, particularly, on the quantification of its biomass through the determination of volatile suspended solids (VSS), which are often considered assimilable to microbial concentration. Table 3 summarizes the measurements performed.
Table 3. Measurements performed for VSS determination.
Vessel/s
Weight (g)
Ceramic vessel + filter (C0)
67.1707
Ceramic vessel + filtre + dried sample (Cf)
67.2718
Melting pot (M0)
45.4666
Melting pot + calcined sample (Mf)
45.4885


In this characterization, total suspended solids (TSS), VSS, and fixed suspended solids (FSS) were determined. TTS corresponds to the solids in water that can be trapped by a filter and are measured as the difference in weight of a filter after a certain volume of sample has been leaked through it and a drying step at 105 ºC has taken place (Ismail et al., 2019). For this assay, 25 mL of suspension (V) was employed, and TSS is calculated as follows,
TSS (g/L)=Cf(g)-C0(g)V (L)=67.2718 g-67.1707 g2.510-2 L=4.04 g/L
VSS, often referred to as mixed liquor suspended solids is taken as total microbial biomass, though not all volatile material is, truly, microbial biomass (Galinha et al., 2018). They are, anyway, fine estimation of the real value and they can be easily calculated as the non-ash part of the TSS (Queenan et al., 1996). The calculation of VSS proceeds as follows,
VSS=TSS-Mf(g)-M0(g)V (L)=4.04 g/L-45.4885 g-45.4666 g2.5010-2 L=3.17 g/L
The reactors in this study had a volume of 500 mL, and they ran with 200 mL of a pre-concentrated sludge at 3X, so they operated with a VSS of 3.80 g/L.
3.2. Validation of the analytical method
For the validation of the analytical method, we assayed different aspects, namely, precision, linearity, detection and quantification limits, and accuracy (Compañó & Ríos, 2002). We constructed a calibration curve with triplicates for each of its 8 points (0, 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10, 16 y 20 mg/L NO3-), where the standard deviation within the triplicates provided the value of precision for each interval. The calibration curve alongside the precision for each standard, and the adjusted model is represented in Figure 1.

Figure 1. Calibration curve for nitrate concentration constructed with triplicates for each point, showing the standard deviation of the measurements, the equation of the adjusted model, and the correlation coefficient. Source: GNU Octave, prepared by the authors.
Linearity of the method was calculated for the final point as follows,
Linearity limit = ymodel-yrealyreal100,
where yreal is the measured absorbance of the final standard (20 mg/L NO3-), and ymodel is the absorbance of the final standard calculated from the calibration curve for the concentration of analyte at that point. Linearity limit has to fall below 3 % in order to be considered linear.
Detection and quantification limits were calculated as 3 and 10 times, respectively, the standard deviation of the measurements of 10 blanks divided by the slope of the calibration curve. 
Finally, accuracy was estimated by calculating the recovery for a ninth standard that was not used to construct the curve and measured 5 times. It was calculated as follows, 
Recovery (%) = ConcmodelConcreal100,
where Concmodel represents the concentration according to the calibration curve applied to the mean value for the 5 measurements of the standard, and Concreal represents the actual concentration of analyte. 
The values of the different parameters obtained during the validation of the method have been condensed into Table 4.
Table 4. Validation of the analytical method.
Parameter
Value
Linearity limit (LL)
0.4 % 
Limit of detection (LOD)
0.2 ppm
Limit of quantification (LOQ)
0.4 ppm
Recovery 
(94.7  0.6) %


The values for LL, DL and QL allow us to conclude that the analytical method is optimal for the range of concentrations that we propose (0.5 - 20 ppm), with a strong correlation (R2 = 0.9993), and with good recovery. Furthermore, the precision and accuracy of the analytical method ensures that any variability that we may encounter moving forward, will not derive from the methodology, but rather from the nature of the systems under study or error, either instrumental or human, when collecting and processing the samples.
3.3. Monitoring of the denitrification process
Results show high variability, which was expected, as it is one of the most traditional disadvantages of biological systems; in some points, though, it may have been compounded by malfunctioning instruments and human error during sample processing prior to analysis. In any case, we have mitigated this problem by selecting those points that are clearly abnormal and discarding them from further calculation. We have also discarded the final points for all the reactors with encapsulated sludge, as they were stopped when the reaction had already ended and, consequently, may not appropriately represent the overall behaviour. Furthermore, the models that we are using, pseudo-zero, pseudo-first, and pseudo-second order reaction rates, should not be applied to the whole data set, only to specific intervals.
The evolution of nitrate concentration in our reactors is shown in Figure 2, for all 4 experiments conducted: needle diameters of 1.27 mm, 1.65 mm, 2.11 mm, and free sludge. The selection of abnormal points has been clearly represented in this figure for transparency.

Figure 2. Nitrate evolution in the reactors with beads with diameter 1.27 mm (A), 1.65 mm (B), 2.11 mm (C), and free sludge (D). The experimental data that will be used to model the reaction rates are represented in green; in red, are the abnormal points with values higher or lower than what they should. Source: GNU Octave, prepared by the authors.
We will elaborate further on the interpretation of these data, as we attempt to modelize their behaviour, but with the information as it is we can conclude that 1) there has been effective denitrification, as nitrate concentration decreases from around 450 ppm to almost 100 ppm with encapsulated sludge and below 20 ppm with free sludge; and 2) denitrification was faster and more complete when free sludge was used.
3.4. Denitrification kinetics modelization
In Figure 3, we have represented the best adjustment for each of the experiments. 

Figure 3. Best-fitted adjustment models for the experiments with bead diameter of 1.27 mm (A), 1.65 mm (B), 2.11 mm (C), and free sludge (D). The experimental data used to model the reaction rates are represented in green; in blue, the adjusted model. There are also represented in each subfigure the parameters of adjustment and the correlation coefficient achieved. Source: GNU Octave, prepared by the authors.
All of the adjustments show correlation coefficients over 0.90, which suggests a strong relation between the model and the experimental data. This result is not a consequence of trimming data, as the experiment with diameter 2.11 mm has only one point removed and experiments with diameters 1.27, 1.65 mm, and free sludge only two each. Final concentrations are not taken into account, as they are outside the range where the modelization would be reliable. 
From the adjusted models we can calculate the kinetic constants. The values obtained are included in Table 5, for easier interpretation.
Table 5.  Kinetic constants and adjustment information.
Encapsulation
Pseudo-order
Kinetic constants
Correlation coefficient
1.27 mm
1st
9.77 · 10-2 h-1 
0.9196
1.65 mm
1st
0.170 h-1
0.9326
2.11 mm
1st
3.44 · 10-2 h-1 
0.9503
Free sludge
1st
0.469 h-1 
0.9885

From these results, we can conclude that, generally, biological denitrification follows pseudo-first order kinetics which is consistent with the scientific literature, as it establishes pseudo-first order for biological denitrification reactions (Kanda et al., 2017; Pulicharla et al., 2018; Reddy et al., 1982). In any case, it would be useful to repeat the experiments with more needles to confirm the result.
Moreover, we can confirm that free sludge does offer faster denitrification rates than encapsulation. Regarding the optimal diameter for encapsulation, it seems that the dependency between kinetic constants and bead diameter traces a parabolic trajectory, with a maximum around 1.65 mm and decreasing as the diameters get both greater and smaller. 
The explanation for this behaviour is not clear, especially when considering further results. We have to discard possible diffusional effects, as total diffusion efficacy is equal to 1 (vide infra); and damages inflicted to the sludge during the encapsulation, as cell viability does not change (cf. Section 3.5). The simplest answer may be, therefore, that there is an equilibrium between bead inner volume and biomass growth that determines reaction rates and possible inhibitory effects; this relation would not be linear, but parabolic. We cannot, however, confirm based on the information available that this is true. The data set that we are analysing is very limited and shows high variability. It would be necessary to repeat the experiments, at least thrice, to mitigate aleatory error and introduce new experiments with more diameters in order to better comprehend the relationship between bead diameters and kinetic constants. 
In Figure 4, we have represented the delinearization of the models alongside the experimental data in order to better illustrate the fidelity of the adjustment. There are several conclusions that we may infer from this figure. First, the models adjust to the initial values properly, though it does not accurately reflect the final stages of the reaction. The final points for encapsulation are significantly higher than what the model predicts - except for diameter 2.11 mm - and coincide around the same values (100 - 150 ppm), which suggests the effect of some kind of inhibition. There are not any toxic elements in the medium, and free sludge does not show this inhibition; furthermore, pH was monitored throughout the reaction and never did it go outside the 6.0 - 8.5 range where denitrifying bacteria are viable (Díaz, 2015), neither did dissolved oxygen or temperature increase over their optimal values. 
Thus, the easiest explanation for this phenomenon is that the encapsulated microorganisms grow so close together within the beads that, at the end of the reaction, they end up inhibiting each other. Another possible answer is the accumulation of some product, like nitrogen gas, within the beads that may not be able to diffuse through the membrane and inhibits the reaction. This hypothesis is supported by the morphological characterization of microbial populations within the sludge (cf. Section 3.5). We can only speculate what the mechanism that mediates this inhibition is. Moreover, we cannot even confirm the inhibition itself, as to confirm its presence would require a comprehensive monitoring of biomass evolution during the reaction both within capsules and free sludge, and then the adjustment of the data gathered to a specific Monod model contemplating inhibitory effects. 


Figure 4. Best-fitted models for nitrate evolution in experiments with bead diameter of 1.27 mm (A), 1.65 mm (B), 2.11 mm (C), and free sludge (D). The experimental data selected for modelization are represented in green; in red, the abnormal points discarded from the modelization; and, in blue, the reaction kinetics model. Source: GNU Octave, prepared by the authors.
Thus, in Figure 5, we have represented the percentage of denitrification based on the adjusted models alongside the experimental data to better show the efficacy of each experiment. This figure clearly shows how the free sludge achieves almost complete denitrification, whilst encapsulated sludge seems to reach a maximum point to which it may tend asymptotically. This maximum appears to be around 70 - 75 %, although its exact position cannot be appropriately determined with our limited data set. It would be necessary to repeat the experiments using different needles to verify that this upper limit persists.

Figure 5. Best-fitted models for denitrification  in experiments with bead diameter of 1.27, 1.65, 2.11 mm, and free sludge. The experimental percentages of denitrification selected for modelization are represented in green; in red, the abnormal points discarded from the modelization; and, in blue, the reaction kinetics model. Source: GNU Octave, prepared by the authors.
Finally, to help explain the variation in kinetic constants, we have calculated the internal diffusion efficacy through Thiele modulus. The calculation of the modulus and the approximations used to estimate the total diffusion efficacy follow the instructions described in Díaz (2015). We have used a bibliographic value for the effective diffusivity of nitrate in 3 % alginate beads (Garbayo et al., 2002), which will render lower values than the ones corresponding to 1 % alginate, but may allow for the broad discussion of differences between encapsulated and free sludge. In Table 6 we have synthesized the values obtained.
Table 6. Total diffusion efficacies.  
Experiment
Thiele modulus
Total diffusion efficacy
1.27 mm
0.1624
1.00
1.65 mm
0.2781
1.00
2.11 mm
0.1601
1.00


We can conclude from these data that the diffusivity through the beads is not a limiting factor for the reaction, which just reinforces the hypothesis that there might be some inhibitory effects within the encapsulated sludge.
3.5. Microbiological studies
3.5.1. Microbial characterization
In order to determine the presence of denitrifying microorganisms, a PCR of the nirK gene, which encodes a copper-containing nitrite reductase, was performed. The first step was the extraction of DNA from the samples, a task that needed an extra treatment in the case of encapsulated microorganisms, involving the presence of EDTA in the first employed solution, which chelates calcium (Banfi et al., 2007), removing it from the alginate capsules facilitating their disaggregation. The agarose gel electrophoresis assay of the samples after the treatment, shown in Figure 6A, reflects the presence of certain bands corresponding to the extracted DNA (the ones positioned at the longer sequence based on the employed marker - presumably around 11,500 bp (Sanger et al., 1982) -, which are highlighted in blue) in the lanes where our samples were run, mainly those injected in wells 3, 4, 5, 6, 9 and 10, implying that the extraction was successful. The undefined traces present at the bottom of the gel probably correspond to degraded RNA, which appears at a low molecular weight (Aranda et al., 2012). A more precise analysis of DNA concentration could have been implemented, performing an spectrophotometric analysis in the UV/Vis range with NanoDrop, which could also have measured the purity of the extracted DNA based on the relation between absorptions at 230 nm - phenol impurities -, 260 nm - nucleic acids -, and 280 - tryptophan, i.e. protein impurities. 
Once the presence of DNA was verified, the PCR was performed. Based on the information indicated in Table 2, the expected amplified fragment should have a length of 514 bp (Braker et al., 1998), which, as can be seen in Figure 6B, was not observed in any sample.
A) B)
Figure 6. Agarose gel electrophoresis results for samples corresponding to initial and final collections of capsules from the bioreaction: 2.11 mm capsules (1 and 2, respectively), 1.65 mm and its replica (3, 4, 7 and 8), 1.27 mm (5 and 6) and free sludge (9 and 10). DNA extraction (A) and PCR amplification of nirK gene (B) results are shown. ''M'' indicates the lane corresponding to the λ-DNA/PstI Marker, a blue rectangle highlights the position of the extracted DNA and a red rectangle marks the position of the expected amplified fragment (514 bp). Source: prepared by the authors.
Based on the absence of amplification, a conflict needs to be addressed, as denitrification was detected in the bioreactions, demonstrating the presence of denitrifying microorganisms, although this microbiological analysis does not provide evidence on the presence of said organisms. Different explanations can be given for this apparent contradiction. Firstly, though nirK1F and nirK5R primers are the most widely used tools to survey the presence of nirK-denitrifying bacteria in environmental samples, they are certainly not perfect, as the nirK1F primer binds to a region of the nirK gene that presents an insert of three bases in some sequences of denitrifying bacteria, biasing the results of the amplification; in fact, different denitrifying strains which express the copper-containing nitrite reductase, show no visible band in an electrophoretic analysis when subjected to a PCR with this primers (Throbäck, 2004), suggesting that a possible explanation of the results obtained in this assay might be the presence of denitrifying organisms for which the primers were not adequate.
Another important factor to be taken into account is the aforementioned existence of two different types of nitrite reductases, the cytochrome cd1 enzyme and the copper-containing one, the former being encoded by the nirS gene, which is present in certain bacterial strains that do not express the nirK gene, thus giving a negative result in a PCR analysis with the primers of interest (Throbäck, 2004). Therefore, part of the denitrifying community is ignored from the analysis which, in our case, could explain the absence of evidence of denitrifying organisms (Henry et al., 2004).
3.5.2. Viability and morphological assay
In order to determine the effects of the encapsulation and the denitrification processes on the viability of the microorganisms carrying out the bioreaction, an assay with two fluorescent intercalating agents, propidium iodide and SYTO 9, was performed on samples taken in an extra denitrification process performed with 1.65 mm external diameter needles. Due to the characteristics of these dyes, cells with a damaged cell membrane, and so considered as non-viable, were observed as red, while microorganisms presenting an intact cell membrane were seen in a green colour. Different samples were analyzed, namely, the free sludge before and after its encapsulation and the encapsulated microorganisms after the bioreaction. 
It was particularly remarkable that, during the course of the different bioreactions, it was observed that, while certain capsules sedimented at the bottom of the tanks, others floated, a factor that was not considered for the sampling destined for the PCR analysis. In the case of this microscopic study, different samples were taken from the bottom and the surface of the bioreactor in order to determine if there were notable differences in their morphology and/or viability.
Figure 7 shows images taken from the samples corresponding to the free sludge before the encapsulation, where no remarkable presence of dead microorganisms can be seen; it should be noted that a certain amount of filamentous microorganisms were found in this sample, a fact that agrees with the reported presence of this type of bacteria in WWTPs, where they entail operational problems derived from bulking and foaming of activated sludge (Miłobędzka et al., 2016). 

Figure 7. Confocal laser scanning microscopy images taken from samples of free sludge previous to the encapsulation process; intact cells (green) and dead ones (red) can be distinguished. A and B represent the same image, although B includes a third channel presenting the relief of the sample; C shows the presence of filamentous microorganisms, highlighting individual dead cells in the microbial cell chains (white arrows). Source: Confocal UnioviImageJ, prepared by the authors
Images showing the samples after the encapsulation process are indicated in Figure 8. No particular decrease in cell viability was detected, a factor that is of great importance, as the encapsulation process involves the heating of the sludges, implying a possible thermal stress of the microorganisms, and mechanical stress during extrusion and gelation of the sludge which could lead to a negative impact on viability; previous literature already shows that this method of encapsulation does not have a significant impact on cell viability, as it is a relatively gentle operation (Iravani et al., 2014; Swioklo et al., 2017) No difference in morphology was either detected and cellular distribution was observed to be uniform throughout the whole capsule area. 
A small number of sarcina-like clusters of cells (cube-shaped aggregations of cocci) were observed in this sample; this kind of dense clusters have been reported to be present in communities of denitrifying anaerobic methane oxidizing microorganisms and nitrate reducing microorganisms (Haroon et al., 2013; Qi et al., 2017), suggesting that our microbial community can be then capable of carrying out the denitrification. However, similar structures have also been described for ammonia-oxidizing bacteria, making it difficult to infer the metabolism of the observed microorganisms (Coskuner et al., 2005).

Figure 8. Confocal laser scanning microscopy images taken from samples right after the encapsulation process; intact cells (green) and dead ones (red) can be distinguished. A and B represent the same image, although B includes a third channel presenting the relief of the sample, showing the edge of the capsule (outlined in white in A); C shows the presence of a sarcina-like cluster (white arrow). Source: Confocal UnioviImageJ, prepared by the authors
As has already been said, during the course of the denitrification process, certain capsules floated in the medium, while others sank; samples taken from these two groups of capsules were observed under the microscope. Figures 9 and 10 show images taken from the sinking and floating encapsulated microorganisms, respectively; although sinking capsule samples presented sarcina-like clusters, their abundance was similar to the one observed in pre-bioreaction, however a greater presence of these structures was seen in samples corresponding to floating capsules. If these aggregates are, indeed, communities of denitrifying organisms, this enrichment would be consistent with consulted literature, as the denitrification process has been reported to result in the growth of denitrifying communities (Ginige et al., 2004). Furthermore, it is possible that the capsules float due to a significantly higher production of nitrogen gas that cannot diffuse out of the capsule, which only supports the hypothesis that these microorganisms present higher denitrification rates. The retention of nitrogen gas within the capsules may be the root cause of the inhibitory effects described in the analysis of reaction kinetics (cf. Section 3.4). 

Figure 9. Confocal laser scanning microscopy images taken from samples of sinking encapsulated microorganisms after the bioreaction; intact cells (green) and dead ones (red) can be distinguished. A and B represent the same image, where a sarcina-like cluster is shown (white arrow), although B includes a third channel presenting the relief of the sample. Source: Confocal UnioviImageJ, prepared by the authors.

Figure 10. Confocal laser scanning microscopy images taken from samples of floating encapsulated microorganisms after the bioreaction; intact cells (green) and dead ones (red) can be distinguished. B represents the amplification of a certain area present in A (marked in a blue square), where a sarcina-like cluster is shown (white arrow). Source: Confocal UnioviImageJ, prepared by the authors.
The absence of superposition of green and red coloration in the presented images shows that propidium iodide and SYTO 9 did not interfere with each other during the dyeing process and worked as expected.
4. Conclusions
In this study, we have developed and validated a robust analytical method for detection and quantification of nitrates in samples with a complex matrix rich in ions and organic matter with a linear range between 0.5 and 20 ppm. This methodology has allowed us to monitor and model the evolution of nitrates in 4 bioreactions assaying the appropriateness of encapsulation for improving active sludge durability and mechanical strength. The results suggest that denitrification can be modelled with pseudo-first order kinetics, which is a conclusion supported by the consulted literature, and that the encapsulation does not alter the pseudo-order of the reaction rate when compared to free sludge. However, the results strongly imply that the encapsulation severely reduces reaction rates, whereas viability assays do not present evidence that it improves cellular viability. Furthermore, results show that whilst free sludge can achieve close to complete denitrification, encapsulated sludge can only denitrify up to 70 - 75 % of the total nitrate. We can only speculate as to what the explanation for this phenomenon is, but estimation of total diffusion efficacy within the beads seems to discard diffusional effects as its root cause. Thus, the simplest answer may be some kind of autoinhibition due perhaps to the retention of nitrogen gas or other products within the beads. 
Regarding the microbiological assays, the negative results retrieved by the amplification of the nirK gene encoding the copper-containing nitrite reductase contrasted with the fact that denitrification was certainly observed, suggesting that the microbial population responsible for the denitrifying process either does not express this protein, or presents a coding sequence which cannot be annealed to the selected primers. Regarding viability, no significant differences were found in samples before and after the encapsulation, neither before and after the denitrification process, although a wider sample should be assayed in order to properly describe this aspect. The study of morphology, on the other hand, showed an interesting enrichment in sarcina-like clusters of cells in microorganisms entrapped in floating capsules after the denitrification took place; these structures have been reported to be abundant in denitrifying microorganisms communities, however, their proper identification should involve a fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis with specific probes to known denitrifying microorganisms in order to ensure that these structures exhibit a correlation with the denitrification.
So, we can conclude that biological denitrification is a fine solution that may eliminate up to 97 % of the contamination from heavily contaminated waters with nitrate concentrations of 400 ppm. The encapsulation, however, does not seem to provide any advantages regarding their viability; and does hamper their ability to denitrify, slowing the process and limiting its efficacy to a 70 - 75 %. Nevertheless, the data set we have worked with in this study is extremely limited and to properly ensure the results it would be convenient to repeat every experiment thrice and introduce more bead sizes to better clarify the relation between bead diameter and reaction rates, Finally, to determine whether there actually is autoinhibition biomass evolution should be followed alongside nitrate concentration to properly adjust the data to a more comprehensive model i.e., Monod kinetics contemplating different inhibitory effects.
5. References

Akhtar M., Hussain F., Qureshi T. M., Ashraf M. Y., Akhter J., & Haq A. (2011). Rapid and Inexpensive Steam Distillation Method for Routine Analysis of Inorganic Nitrogen in Alkaline Calcareous Soils. Communications in Soil Science and Plant Analysis, 42(8), 920–931.
Aranda P. S., LaJoie D. M., & Jorcyk C. L. (2012). Bleach gel: A simple agarose gel for analyzing RNA quality. Electrophoresis, 33(2), 366–369.
Arend K.K., Beletsky D., DePinto J.V., Ludsin S.A., Roberts J.J., and Rucinski D.K. (2011). Seasonal and interannual effects of hypoxia on fish habitat quality in central Lake Erie. Freshw. Biol, 56, 366–383.
Banfi G., Salvagno G. L. & Lippi G. (2007). The role of ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA) as in vitro anticoagulant for diagnostic purposes. Clinical Chemical Laboratory Medicine, 45(5).
Bouabidi Z. B., El-Naas M. H. & Zhang Z. (2018). Immobilization of microbial cells for the biotreatment of wastewater: A review. Environmental Chemistry Letters, 17, 241-257.
Braker G., Fesefeldt A., Witzel K. P. (1998). Development of PCR primer systems for amplification of nitrite reductase genes (nirK and nirS) to detect denitrifying bacteria in environmental samples. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 64(10): 3769-75.
Compañó R. & Ríos Á. (2002). Garantía de la calidad en los laboratorios analíticos. Ed. Síntesis, Madrid.
Coskuner G., Ballinger S. J., Davenport R. J., Pickering R. L., Solera R., Head I. M., & Curtis T. P. (2005). Agreement between Theory and Measurement in Quantification of Ammonia-Oxidizing Bacteria. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 71(10), 6325–6334.
Deaker R., Roughley R. J., Kennedy I. R. (2004). Legume seed inoculation technology—a review. Soil Biol Biochem, 36, 1275–1288.
Díaz M. (2015). Ingeniería de bioprocesos. Ed. Paraninfo, Madrid.
Dodds W. K., Bouska W. W., Eitzmann J. L., Pilger T. J., Pitts K. L., Riley A. J., Schloesser J. T., Thornbrugh D. J. (2009). Eutrophication of U.S. Freshwaters: Analysis of Potential Economic Damages. Environmental Science & Technology, 43(1), 12–19.
Gal C., Frenzel W., & Möller J. (2004). Re-Examination of the Cadmium Reduction Method and Optimisation of Conditions for the Determination of Nitrate by Flow Injection Analysis. Microchimica Acta, 146(2), 155–164.
Garbayo I., León R., & Vı́lchez C. (2002). Diffusion characteristics of nitrate and glycerol in alginate. Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces, 25(1), 1–9.
Galinha C. F., Sanches S., & Crespo J. G. (2018). Membrane bioreactors. Fundamental Modelling of Membrane Systems, 209–249.
Ginige M. P., Hugenholtz P., Daims H., Wagner M., Keller J., & Blackall L. L. (2004). Use of Stable-Isotope Probing, Full-Cycle rRNA Analysis, and Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization-Microautoradiography To Study a Methanol-Fed Denitrifying Microbial Community. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 70(1), 588–596.
Haroon M. F., Hu S., Shi Y., Imelfort M., Keller J., Hugenholtz P., Yuan Z., & Tyson G. W. (2013). Anaerobic oxidation of methane coupled to nitrate reduction in a novel archaeal lineage. Nature, 500(7464), 567–570.
Haugan B. E., Mininni G. (1981). Characterization of Sewage Sludges. In: L’Hermite P., Ott H. (eds) Characterization, Treatment and Use of Sewage Sludge. Springer, Dordrecht.
Henry S., Baudoin E., López-Gutiérrez J. C., Martin-Laurent F., Brauman A. & Philippot L. (2004). Quantification of denitrifying bacteria in soils by nirK gene targeted real-time PCR. Journal of Microbiological Methods, 59(3), 327–335.
Huno, S. K., Rene, E. R., van Hullebusch, E. D., & Annachhatre, A. P. (2018). Nitrate removal from groundwater: a review of natural and engineered processes. Journal of Water Supply: Research and Technology-Aqua, 67(8), 885-902.
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans: Ingested Nitrate and Nitrite and Cyanobacterial Peptide Toxins; IARC: Lyon, France, 2010.
Invitrogen. LIVE/DEAD® BacLight Bacterial Viability Kit. (2014). [Internet]. https://www.thermofisher.com/document-connect/document-connect.html?url=https%3A%2F%2Fassets.thermofisher.com%2FTFS-Assets%2FLSG%2Fmanuals%2Fmp07007.pdf&title=TElWRSYjNDc7REVBRCAmbHQ7aSZndDtCYWMmbHQ7L2kmZ3Q7TGlnaHQgQmFjdGVyaWFsIFZpYWJpbGl0eSBLaXRz (consulted 24/02/2021).
Iravani S., Korbekandi H., & Mirmohammadi S. V. (2014). Technology and potential applications of probiotic encapsulation in fermented milk products. Journal of Food Science and Technology, 52(8), 4679–4696.
Ismail A. F., Khulbe K. C., & Matsuura T. (2019). RO Membrane Fouling. Reverse Osmosis, 189–220.
Kadimpati K. K., Mondithoka K. P., Bheemaraju S., Challa V. R. M. (2013). Entrapment of marine microalga, Isochrysis galbana, for biosorption of Cr(III) from aqueous solution: isotherms and spectroscopic characterization. Applied Water Science, 3, 85–92.
Kanda R., Kishimoto N., Hinobayashi J., et al. (2017). Influence of temperature and COD loading on biological nitrification–denitrification process using a trickling filter: an empirical modeling approach. International Journal of Environmental Research, 11, 71-82.
Lin Y.-H. & Gu Y.-J. (2020). Denitrification Kinetics of Nitrate by a Heterotrophic Culture in Batch and Fixed-Biofilm Reactors. Processes, 8(5), 547.
Miłobędzka, A., Witeska, A., & Muszyński, A. (2016). Factors affecting population of filamentous bacteria in wastewater treatment plants with nutrients removal. Water Science and Technology, 73(4), 790–797.
Paerl H. W. (1988). Nuisance phytoplankton blooms in coastal, estuarine, and inland waters. Limnology and Oceanography 33, 823-847.
Picot A., Lacroix C. (2003). Production of multiphase water-insoluble microcapsules for cell microencapsulation using an emulsification/spray-drying technology. J Food Sci, 68, 2693–2700.
Power J. F. & Schepers J. S. (1989). Nitrate contamination of groundwater in North America. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 26(3-4), 165–187.
Qi X., Carberry D. M., Cai C., Hu S., Yuan Z., Rubinsztein-Dunlop H., & Guo J. (2017). Optical sorting and cultivation of denitrifying anaerobic methane oxidation archaea. Biomedical Optics Express, 8(2), 934-942.
Rennie P. J., Summer A. M., Basketter F. B. (1979). Determination of Nitrate in Raw, Potable and Waste Waters by Ultraviolet Spectrophotometry. The Analyst, 104(1242), 837-845
Seth D., Mishra H. N. & Deka S. C. (2017). Effect of microencapsulation using extrusion technique on viability of bacterial cells during spray drying of sweetened yoghurt. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 103, 802–807.
Skoog, D. A., Holler, F. J., & Crouch, S. R. (2017). Principles of instrumental analysis. Cengage learning.
Swioklo S., Ding P., Pacek A. W., & Connon C. J. (2017). Process parameters for the high-scale production of alginate-encapsulated stem cells for storage and distribution throughout the cell therapy supply chain. Process Biochemistry, 59, 289–296.
Queenan K., Burton C. H., & Bechir C. (1996). Development of a centrifuge-based procedure to analyse agricultural effluents for total and volatile suspended solids. Bioresource Technology, 57(3), 259–263.
Reineccius T. A., Reineccius G. A., Peppard T. L. (2002). Encapsulation of flavors using cyclodextrins: comparison of flavor retention in alpha, beta and gamma types. J Food Sci, 67, 3271–3279.
Sanger F., Coulson A. R., Hong G. F., Hill D. F., Petersen G.B. (1982). Nucleotide sequence of bacteriophage lambda DNA.Journal of Molecular Biology, 162(4), 729-73.
Sasaki E., Kuruyama F., Ida J., Matsuyama T., Yamamoto H. (2008). Preparation of microcapsules by electrostatic atomization. J Electrostat, 66, 312–318.
Sheu T. Y., Marshall R. T. (1993). Microentrapment of Lactobacilli in calcium alginate gels. J Food Sci, 58, 557–561.
Throbäck, I. N., Enwall, K., Jarvis,Å., & Hallin, S. (2004). Reassessing PCR primers targeting nirS, nirK and nosZ genes for community surveys of denitrifying bacteria with DGGE. FEMS Microbiology Ecology, 49(3), 401–417.
Pulicharla R., Zolfaghari M., Kaur-Brar S., et al. (2018). Acute Impact of Chlortetracycline on Nitrifying and Denitrifying Processes, Water Environment Research. 604-614.
Reddy K. R., Rao P. S. C. & Jessup R. E. (1982). The Effect of Carbon Mineralization on Denitrification Kinetics in Mineral and Organic Soils1. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 46(1), 62-68.
Visocolor. 2020. ECO Nitrat 931041 Test 5-41. [Internet]. https://www.mn-net.com/colorimetric-test-kit-visocolor-eco-nitrate-931041 (consulted 08/03/2021).
Vitousek P. M., Aber J. D., Howarth R. W., Likens G. E., Matson P. A., Schindler D. W., Schlesinger W.H., Tilman D. G. (1997). Human alteration of the global nitrogen cycle: Sources and consequences. Ecological Applications, 7(3), 737–750.
Wampler D. J. (1992). Flavor encapsulation: a method for providing maximum stability for dry flavors systems. Cereal foods World, 37, 817–820.
Ward M., Jones R., Brender J., de Kok T., Weyer P., Nolan B., Villanueva C. M., van Breda S. (2018). Drinking Water Nitrate and Human Health: An Updated Review. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 15(7), 1557.
Watanabe Y., Fang X., Minemoto Y., Adachi S., Matsuno R. (2002). Suppressive effect of saturated acyl L-ascorbate on the oxidation of linoleic acid encapsulated with maltodextrin or gum arabic by spray-drying. J Agric Food Chem, 50,3984–3987.
Yeo Y., Back N., Park K. (2001). Microencapsulation methods for delivery of protein drugs. Biotechnol Bioproc E, 6, 213–230



























6. Annexes
Annex I: Protocol for DNA extraction
Resuspend an appropriate volume of sample (either encapsulated or free sludge) in 250 μL of Buffer I (0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 25μg/mL RNAse, 1.5 mg/mL lysozyme, 0.5 mg/mL proteinase K, 0.1 M EDTA) and subject it to vigorous agitation in the vortex.
Incubate at 37 ºC for 5 minutes.
Add 250 μL of Buffer II (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 5 mM NaCl, 0.1 M EDTA, 1% SDS) and agitate vigorously.
Incubate at 37 ºC for 10 minutes.
Add 500 μL of neutral phenol to extract impurities. Agitate vigorously until the two generated phases are mixed together.
Centrifuge for 5 minutes at 14000 rpm to separate both phases.
Collect the upper (aqueous) phase and transfer it to a clean eppendorf.
Add 500 μL of chloroform to eliminate traces of phenol.
Agitate vigorously and centrifuge for 3 minutes at 14000 rpm. Collect the aqueous phase and transfer it to a clean eppendorf.
Add 0.1 volumes of 3 M sodium acetate and 1.5 volumes of isopropyl alcohol to precipitate the DNA at - 20 ºC for 30 minutes.
Centrifuge 5 minutes at 14000 rpm and discard the supernatant.
Wash the pellet adding 200 μL of 70% ethanol.
Agitate vigorously and centrifuge for 3 minutes at 14000 rpm .
Dry the pellet and resuspend it in 100 μL Tris-EDTA buffer.
















Annex II: Protocol for the PCR
Mixture for the PCR
1 μL of a solution of around 50 ng of DNA
0,5 μL 10 μM stock nirK1F primer 
0,5 μL 10 μM stock nirK5R primer 
2 μL 5X buffer (PHUSION)
0,05 μL polymerase (PHUSION) + 
1 μL 2 mM stock dNTPs
4,9 μL H2O
PCR cycles
95 ºC - 30’’
45 ºC - 40’’
72 ºC - 40’’
95 ºC - 30’’
44.5 ºC - 40’’
72 ºC - 40’’
95 ºC - 30’’
44 ºC - 40’’
72 ºC - 40’’
95 ºC - 30’’
43.5 ºC - 40’’
72 ºC - 40’’
95 ºC - 30’’
43 ºC - 40’’
72 ºC - 40’’
95 ºC - 30’’
42.5 ºC - 40’’
72 ºC - 40’’
95 ºC - 30’’
42 ºC - 40’’
72 ºC - 40’’
95 ºC - 30’’
41.5 ºC - 40’’
72 ºC - 40’’
95 ºC - 30’’
41 ºC - 40’’
72 ºC - 40’’
95 ºC - 30’’
40.5 ºC - 40’’
72 ºC - 40’’
95 ºC - 30’’
40 ºC - 40’’
72 ºC - 40’’
20 cycles
95 ºC - 30’’
43 ºC - 40’’
72 ºC - 40’’
72 ºC - 7’
BACULOVIRUS EXPRESSION SYSTEM FOR RECOMBINANT VIRAL PROTEIN PRODUCTION IN INSECT CELLS
Raúl Fernández Díaz, Pablo Fernández García & Silvia González López - Group 2 Contact: UO263619@uniovi.es
Deliverable 3
Abstract
Baculovirus expression systems can be used to produce recombinant proteins with adequate post-translational modifications in insect cells. In this study, they enabled the production of VP60, a protein from the rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus that has been proven to be an effective antigen for immunization. Sf9 cells were cultured and transduced with a multiplicity of infection of 3.5 for 96 h; and samples from cell extracts and medium were analysed with size exclusion chromatography. Based on the structural characteristics of the protein, fractions at the exclusion limit and at the elution time for 60 kDa were collected and further analysed with SDS-PAGE. 
The chromatographic analyses on samples from transduced and non-transduced cells showed two differential peaks at the expected positions in the obtained chromatograms, hinting at distinct protein profiles in both sample groups. The ulterior analysis of eluted fractions showed the presence of 60 kDa proteins in treated cell extract samples and their absence in the negative controls, thus, confirming that transduction was achieved. This result was particularly notable at the elution time for 60 kDa molecules, where a band that may correspond to a degradation product of VP60 was detected. Moreover, the presence of VP60 was also detected in fractions from the exclusion limit, confirming the formation of aggregates.








Index
1. Introduction	3
2. Materials and methods	4
2.1. Insect cell culture and transduction	4
2.2. Chromatographic analysis of cell extracts	4
2.3. Sample analysis by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE)	5
3. Results and discussion	5
3.1. Monitoring of Sf9 cell culture	5
3.2. Chromatographic analysis of cell extracts and medium	7
3.2.1. Calibration of the size exclusion chromatography column	7
3.2.2. Samples chromatographic analysis	9
3.3. SDS-PAGE analysis of cell extracts and medium	13
4. Conclusions	16
5. References	17
6. Annexes	21
Annex I: SDS-PAGE reagents	21











1. Introduction
The Baculoviridae is a family that encompasses more than 86 species of virus known to infect over 600 species of insects. Their virions can present two distinct structures, namely, budded virus and occlusion-derived virus. Budded viruses exhibit a characteristic elongated shape, reminiscent of that of a stick, from which they receive their name - baculum is the latin word for cane -; whereas occlusion derived viruses are resistance forms meant to protect the virions from the environment until their ingestion by a susceptible host, facilitating the horizontal transmission of infection in larval populations. As such, they are embedded within a matrix of polyhedrins (Guarino, 2011; Hoffman et al., 1995; Rohrmann, 1986). Therein lies the enormous potential of baculovirus expression vector systems (BEVSs), as they are able to hijack the cellular molecular machinery for the relatively massive production of protein. A key characteristic of baculoviruses is that the production of polyhedrin is not necessary for the production of viral particles that retain their infectivity in cell culture, though it is in nature (Van Oers, 2011). Therefore, the polyhedrin gene can be replaced by an heterologous gene that would be, thereafter, under the control of the polyhedrin promoter without compromising infection rates and enabling the production of comparatively large quantities of the resultant protein, which could be easily isolated and purified
The baculoviral genome is a double-stranded covalently-closed circular DNA that contains from 80 to 180 kilobases, depending on the species (Miele et al., 2011). The most common BEVSs are derived from the Autographa californica multiple nucleopolyhedrovirus (AcMNPV), as it can infect multiple insect cell lines. 
BEVSs have been proven to be useful tools for the production of recombinant proteins with a wide range of possible applications. Among them, perhaps the most remarkable - and certainly topical - is their role in vaccine production, particularly in the race for the development of effective therapies against the SARS-CoV-2 (Amanat & Krammer, 2020). Furthermore, it has been reported that viral structural proteins produced with BEVSs are able to self-assemble into ordered structures resembling those naturally generated (Contreras-Gómez et al., 2013) that are, hence, more effective at directing the immune response against their natural counterparts. Moreover, as baculovirus can only infect certain invertebrate species, they are not hazardous for the human being and, consequently, their handling does not entail any danger neither for the researchers nor for their communities (Hu, 2006).
So, to sum up, BEVSs are fine expression systems that i) produce significant quantities of recombinant protein in insect cell cultures; ii) take advantage of the eukaryotic molecular machinery of host cells for the post-translational processing of the desired proteins including folding and oligomerization so as to obtain products more similar to those found in mammalian cells (Contreras-Gómez et al., 2013); and, iii) do not require any special safety precautions beyond those inherent to cell culturing. 
However, the use of BEVSs also presents certain drawbacks, considering that a) insect cells can introduce slightly different N-glycosylations when compared to mammalian cells, due to the lack of certain glycosylases, and b) the processing of heterologous proteins is inefficient when the proteins are synthesized as large inactive protein precursors (Beljelarskaya, 2011).
The main aim of this study is to obtain and purify a viral structural protein from insect cell cultures transduced with a recombinant baculovirus vector. The viral protein we will be producing is VP60, a structural protein from the rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus (RHDV), a member of the Caliciviridae family. This particular disease is characterized by hemorrhagic lesions affecting the liver and lungs, causing a mortality rate up to 90 % with an incubation period of one or two days. Its lethality makes it crucial to immunize these animals to prevent their infection, a task for which the coat protein subunit VP60 - also known as VP1 (Moreno et al., 2016) - has been proven appropriate. In some of these studies, baculoviruses were used for producing the protein in insect cell culture (Laurent et al., 1994; Marín et al., 1995).
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Insect cell culture and transduction
We used Sf9 insect cells, a cellular line derived from the ovary of Spodoptera frugiperda, commonly known as fall armyworm (ATCC, 2021). Subculturing was performed by diluting 1:6 an established culture at ~ 80 % confluency into a T75 flask. Standard culturing procedure was followed: the adherent cells were detached from the bottom of the original flask and 2 mL of cell suspension was transferred to the new flask, containing 10 mL of Insect-XPRESS™ medium (Lonza, 2021) supplemented with inactivated fetal bovine serum (5 %) and antibiotics (penicillin and streptomycin). 
This culture was incubated for 72 h at 28 ºC until an adequate confluency was achieved and subsequently infected with the recombinant baculovirus at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 3.5. The infected cells were then subcultured in Insect-XPRESS™ medium with no supplementation at 28 ºC. After 96 h, cells were detached from the surface of the flask and suspended in medium; this suspension was centrifuged at 500 xg for 5 min and both cellular pellet and supernatant were stored at - 70 ºC for 1 day. A negative control, not infected Sf9 cellular culture, was also subjected to this procedure.
Then, the culture was prepared for protein purification: the supernatant was lyophilized for 24 h in order to preconcentrate it for a chromatographic assay and resuspended in ammonium acetate; the pellet was resuspended in ammonium acetate and sonicated in 5 cycles of 20 s on / 20 s off of at a 30 % amplitude. Sonicated suspensions were centrifuged at 16,595 xg and 4 ºC for 10 min. The resultant supernatant was the cell extract, also subject to an analytical chromatographic purification of the protein of interest.
2.2. Chromatographic analysis of cell extracts
Protein purification was achieved by performing a size exclusion chromatography with Superdex 200 10/300 GL column for the separation of molecules within the 10 - 600 kDa range (Merck, 2021b) coupled to a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with an UV/Vis detector set at 280 nm and 50 mM ammonium acetate (pH 7) as eluent. Before the purification, a calibration was performed to determine the estimated retention time for the protein of interest. We analysed solutions with 1 mg/mL of different proteins with known molecular mass - bovine thyroglobulin, bovine serum albumin (BSA), horseradish peroxidase, and bovine β-lactoglobulin - and their retention times were measured. Special attention was taken to ensure that the flux and pressure within the system did not astray from their optimal values (0.6 mL/min and 15 bar, respectively).
For the study of cell extracts and media, a 100 μL loop was coupled to the chromatography column and the run time was set at 50 min. Fractions were taken at specific intervals during the process and lyophilized for their subsequent analysis.
2.3. Sample analysis by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE)
Lyophilized samples were analysed by SDS-PAGE. Thus, samples were resuspended in distilled water and a dissociation buffer containing SDS and β-mercaptoethanol and later analysed in a 10 % polyacrylamide gel with 1 % SDS, under an electric field of 150 V until the dye front reached the end of the gel. Gels were then stained with a solution of Coomassie Blue and subsequently submerged in a destaining solution multiple times until the bands were clearly visible (cf. Annex I).
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Monitoring of Sf9 cell culture
Cell morphology and confluency were monitored to determine the state of the Sf9 insect cell culture and the appropriate times for transduction. Figure 1 shows photographs taken from the culture at different times before transduction.

Figure 1. Photographs of Sf9 insect cell culture the day of the subculture (a), 24 h after (b), 48 h after (c), and 72 h after, the day of the transduction (d). Source: prepared by the authors.
It is evident that confluency increased steadily each day, an observation that matches the characteristics of the cells, as their doubling time is estimated to be between 24 and 30 h; their appearance is also concordant with what was expected, as Sf9 cells are reported to have a spherical shape with a regular size and might present certain granular appearance (Gibco, 2017). 
In particular, we can analyse more precisely the confluency, as the original culture from which these cells were obtained was diluted 1:6 from a confluency of approximately 80 %. Therefore, the initial confluence was set at around 13 % the day of the subculture, 23 % after 24 h, 40 % after 48 h and 74 % the day of the transduction. Although these theoretical values cannot be properly compared to the observation of the culture, cell density seems to correspond with what was predicted.
No cell count was performed before the transduction, although an estimation was guessed based on their confluency. 75 cm2 flasks can hold around 1.2107 Sf9 cells when a 100 % confluency is achieved (Gibco, 2017); based on the observed confluency, a certain volume of viral suspension was added, so as to obtain a MOI of 3.5. This value was deemed sufficient, albeit previous studies employed up to 10 MOIs (Bárcena et al., 2004; Marín et al., 1995).
The infected cell culture was observed 96 h after the transduction. We looked for signs of infection. These signs may include arrested cell growth, detachment, irregular cell shapes, and increased cell size (Üstün-Aytekin et al., 2013). Figure 2 shows the aspect of the culture immediately before the transduction and 96 h post-infection for a better comparison; in contrast to the expected development of the culture, confluency increased, suggesting cell growth after the transduction, and, though detachment is visible, as Figure 2b shows presence of floating cells, some seem to still be attached, meaning that not all Sf9 cells were successfully transduced. Morphology cannot be properly described nor size, as high cellular density in the image after transduction difficultates their adequate observation. 

Figure 2. Photographs of Sf9 insect cell culture before the transduction (a) and 96 h post-infection (b). Source: prepared by the authors.
3.2. Chromatographic analysis of cell extracts and medium
3.2.1. Calibration of the size exclusion chromatography column
The calibration of the chromatography column included the proteins indicated in Table 1. Figure 3 shows the superimposed chromatograms for the assay of each of the four proteins selected as standards. The decimal logarithms of their molecular masses were represented against their retention times (Vander Heyden et al., 2002) and adjusted with the least-squares method in Figure 4. The resultant equation for the linear regression is, 
log(MM) = - 0.1092 tr + 4.3502, 
with a correlation coefficient R2 = 0.9984, where MM is the molecular mass of the different proteins and tr is their retention time.
Table 1. Relation of the proteins and their molecular mass employed in the calibration
Protein
Molecular mass (kDa)
Retention time (min)
Bovine thyroglobulin
660 (Di Jeso & Arvan, 2016)
14.178
BSA
66.5 (Feng et al., 1991)
22.602
Horseradish peroxidase
44 (Richter et al., 2013)
24.721
Bovine β-lactoglobulin
36.8 (Fee et al., 2013)
25.945



Figure 3. Superimposed representation of the four obtained chromatograms for each of the standards: bovine thyroglobulin (blue), BSA (red), horseradish peroxidase (green) and bovine β-lactoglobulin. Source: prepared by the authors.

Figure 4. Calibration curve of Superdex 200 10/300 GL size exclusion chromatography column adjusted with the least-squares method. Source: prepared by the authors.
Though horseradish peroxidase and bovine β-lactoglobulin showed clear and individual peaks during the calibration, thyroglobulin and BSA showed double peaks: one at a lower retention time and with less absorbance and the second at a higher retention time and greater absorbance; in both cases, the chosen retention time was the one with a higher absorbance value. In the case of thyroglobulin, this choice was based upon previous literature that established that thyroglobulin can form aggregates that have greater mass than what was expected (Ernst et al. 2018; Hong et al., 2012; Merck, 2021a).  Regarding the BSA chromatogram, the first registered peak is six times lower than the second, which may be due either to the formation of aggregates, as with the thyroglobulin, or to the degradation of the protein into simpler structures that may have polymerized amongst themselves. In any case, this behaviour has not been described in similar contexts and merits further analysis, perhaps using newer stocks or with different eluents.
This calibration allowed for the estimation of retention times for VP60, based on two factors, 1) the molecular mass of the protein, of approximately 60 kDa (Parra et al., 1993), and 2) its tendency to self-assemble and form aggregates comprising up to 180 units of VP60 protein, which amounts for 10,800 kDa (Bárcena et al., 2004; Wang et al., 2013). These aggregates can only be detected under non-reducing conditions (Farnós et al., 2009). Considering this, the protein ought to be in the fractions recovered at 1) around 23.5 min of retention time, based on the calibration curve, and 2) the exclusion limit, where proteins with a molecular weight higher than 600 kDa should elute.
3.2.2. Samples chromatographic analysis
VP60 protein expressed in Sf9 insect cells after baculovirus transduction has been reported to appear in the cytosolic fraction (Bárcena et al., 2004; López-Vidal et al., 2015; Marín et al., 1995), however, culture medium was also collected and analyzed to perform a wider study.
Figures 5 and 6 show the resulting chromatograms from the cell extract analysis from infected and non-infected cells (negative control), respectively. Collected fractions have been indicated with rectangles and brackets.

Figure 5. Infected cell extract chromatogram. Red rectangles signal the collected fractions and blue brackets indicate the identification of the tubes in which the different volumes were collected. Source: prepared by the authors.

Figure 6. Non-infected cell extract chromatogram. Red squares signal the collected fractions and blue brackets indicate the identification of the tubes in which the different volumes were collected. Source: prepared by the authors.
For a better comparison of the chromatograms represented in Figures 5 and 6, Figure 7 shows both chromatograms superimposed. This combination clearly illustrates that the exclusion time of 12.595 min is common to both samples, although the peak at 10.492 min is only present in the analysis of infected cell extract, which can be a consequence of the presence of a certain compound with a molecular weight such that elutes at an early exclusion limit. It should also be noted that the peak at 24.125 min in the infected cell extract, which would correspond to a molecular mass similar to VP60, is absent in the non-infected cell extract.


Figure 7. Representation of infected (blue) and non-infected (orange) cells extracts chromatograms. Source: prepared by the authors.
A second chromatography was run in order to purify more protein in case it was needed in subsequent analyses (chromatogram not represented). This second chromatogram showed an equivalent profile to the one in Figure 4, and the eluted fractions collected in each tube are described in Table 2.
Table 2. Relation of retention times of the peaks obtained in the second chromatogram for infected cells cell extract and the tubes in which they were collected.
Peak retention time (min)
Collection tube number
10.231
5
12.502
6
24.234
7 and 8


The chromatogram correspondent to the lyophilized culture media is shown in Figure 8; the three final peaks observed in the chromatogram allegedly correspond to different low molecular weight compounds present in the composition of the medium, like amino acids, as has already been observed in size exclusion chromatography on culture media samples (Shaddeau et al., 2019). 

Figure 8. Lyophilized infected cells culture medium chromatogram. Source: prepared by the authors.
Due to the high absorbance presented by these last three peaks, a magnification of the area of interest (between 0 and 26 min) is shown in Figure 9.

Figure 9. Magnification of the area of interest of the lyophilized infected cells culture medium chromatogram. Blue brackets indicate the  identification of the tubes in which the different volumes were collected. Source: prepared by the authors.
To facilitate the comprehension of the previously shown chromatograms, Figure 10 superimposes the data in Figures 7 (cell extracts) and 8 (medium). Once again, the peak at around 12.595 min is common to the three samples. The medium returns less defined peaks compared to cell extracts, and a peak at 24.414 min can be seen in the medium chromatogram (comparable to the one obtained at 24.125 min for infected cells extract), although partially covered by adjacent peaks (as seen in Figure 9, tube 14).

Figure 10. Representation of infected (blue) and non-infected (orange) cells extracts, coupled with infected cells culture medium (grey), chromatograms. Source: prepared by the authors.
3.3. SDS-PAGE analysis of cell extracts and medium
Even though the size exclusion chromatography of cell extracts and medium allows for the separation of protein fractions depending on their molecular weight, it is necessary to perform a procedure to discern whether Sf9 cells infection had been successful and, if so, whether the purification of VP60 was achieved and which fractions contained the protein of interest. An SDS-PAGE allows the electrophoretic separation of proteins based only on their molecular weight, as they are denatured and negatively charged by SDS and their disulfide bridges are reduced by β-mercaptoethanol (Berkowitz, 2020). This ensures that the VP60 protein present in the samples will be exclusively present as a single unit, i.e. with a molecular weight of 60 kDa.
Certain elution fractions were chosen for this assay, based on the likelihood of them containing VP60 protein estimated from the retention times they were collected in. Apart from these fractions, non-chromatographically purified samples of infected and non-infected cell extracts, apart from infected cell medium, were tested in order to appreciate the magnitude of the purification. The two resultant gels derived from this assay are shown in Figure 11, so as to obtain a wider view of the locations of the different bands.

Figure 11. Stained SDS-PAGEs with all studied samples. Molecular weights shown at both sides of the gel indicate the size of the bands present in the “Marker” lane. “E (+)” and “E (-)” represent the samples corresponding to non-purified infected and non-infected cell extract, respectively, and “M (+)” indicates the lane in which a sample from non-purified infected cells medium was assayed. Source: prepared by the authors.
To allow a better analysis of both gels, they are individually presented in Figures 12 and 13. In both figures, three regions have been highlighted. The red one indicates the area in which a protein of around 66 kDa would appear; Figure 12 shows the presence of slight bands in lanes where samples 4 and 8 were analysed, which are those collected at a retention time of ~ 24 min in samples corresponding to the cell extract from infected cells. This band is likely correspondent to BSA, as its molecular weight is 66.5 kDa (Feng et al., 1991) and it is the major component in fetal bovine serum (Mesalam et al., 2019), which was a component of the original culture medium before the transduction took place, so a certain amount of it could still be present in the cell extract.
Green and purple squares highlight two bands which, in Figure 12, are only seen in the lane corresponding to sample number 4. Based on previous literature regarding SDS-PAGE studies on virus particles, the more intense band, marked in green, would correspond with the protein of interest (VP60), as its position corresponds to a molecular weight of 60 kDa, while the light band, marked in purple, most likely represents a degradation product of VP60 (Sasnauskas et al., 1999). 
Regarding the samples collected at the chromatographic exclusion limit, only a faint band can be seen in the lane corresponding to sample 5 (infected cell extract chromatogram, 10.231 min retention time) at a molecular weight equivalent to the VP60 protein unit (green rectangle), suggesting the presence of the aforementioned 180 units-aggregate (Bárcena et al., 2004; Wang et al., 2013) as well as the absence of the degraded form. However, the lack of degradation products is not conclusive, as in lane 4 the band is already light, and considering the faintness of the 60 kDa band, there might be some degradation product at a concentration such that we are not able to appreciate. It may be necessary to concentrate fraction 5 to ensure both the presence of VP60 protein and its degradation products.

Figure 12. Stained SDS-PAGE with samples 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9 and 10. Molecular weights shown at both sides of the gel indicate the size of the bands present in the “Marker” lane. Red, green and purple squares highlight regions with visible bands at different positions, presumptively identified as BSA, VP60 protein and degraded VP60 protein, respectively. Source: prepared by the authors.
In the gel shown in Figure 13, a similar analysis can be made. The lane correspondent to sample 14 (medium sample, 24.414 min retention time) shows a band at a molecular weight of around 68 kDa, and so it could be assimilated once again to be the remaining BSA in the culture medium. The lane correspondent to the non-chromatographically purified infected cell medium sample (M (+)) shows a strong band at the same level, a fact that supports the hypothesis of the presence of BSA in the media after the transduction; this lane also presents traces of different bands along the lane, even showing slightly marked bands at the expected positions for VP60 and its degradation product, something that could indicate the release of a certain amount of protein to the medium, as well as an increased dyeing at the lowest point of the gel, which coincide with the chromatogram shown in Figure 8, where a great amount of low molecular weight compounds were detected. 
The lane corresponding to the sample of infected cells extract (E (+)) shows various faint bands at different molecular sizes, although two clear bands can be seen at the positions identified in the discussion of Figure 12 as VP60 and its degradation product. On the other hand, the lane where the sample coming from non-infected cells cell extract (E (-)) was analysed does show clear bands, although none of them correspond to the pattern present in the previously described lanes, implying the absence of VP60 protein and so agreeing with the expected results considering the lack of infection in this cells. It must be noted that chromatographically purified samples from this non-infected cell extract showed no obvious bands in the electrophoretic analysis.

Figure 13. Stained SDS-PAGE with samples 13, 14, E (+), E (-), M (+), 1 (-) and 2 (-). Molecular weights shown at both sides of the gel indicate the size of the bands present in the “Marker” lane. Red, green and purple squares highlight regions with visible bands at different positions, presumptively identified as BSA, VP60 protein and degraded VP60 protein, respectively. Source: prepared by the authors.
4. Conclusions
The aim of this study was the production of the coat protein subunit VP60 employing a BEVS and its purification, a task for which Sf9 cells were transduced with a baculovirus containing the coding sequence of this protein.
In order to determine if the protein had successfully been produced, the first step of a size exclusion chromatography purification allowed us to compare the profiles of infected and non-infected cells extract, observing a clear distinction in the area corresponding to the elution time of proteins of a molecular weight of 60 kDa (peak present in infected cells cell extract and absent in non-infected cells one) and an extra peak at between 10 and 10.5 min retention time in the case of infected cells cell extract. The ulterior electrophoretic analysis of the fractions corresponding to these different absorbance peaks showed that the collected elutions at those exclusively present in cell extracts from infected cells chromatograms displayed the presence of a protein with a molecular weight of 60 kDa. These results would mean that the protein of interest was indeed produced by the cells and that, as literature indicated, a certain amount of it was generated in the form of aggregates. The presence of a band at the position of a slightly lighter than 60 kDa molecular weight in the samples allegedly showing the presence of VP60 agrees with a possible degraded form of this protein in the fractions eluted at around 24 min elution time; however, one of the samples taken at the exclusion limit of infected cells cell extract did not show a clear band corresponding to this degraded form, maybe indicating that no degradation occurs when the protein is presented as an aggregate, although a closer analysis on a concentrated fraction should be conducted in order to test this hypothesis.
Regarding the medium samples, although some slight bands were detected at the position corresponding to the molecular weight of VP60, a much clearer band is present at around 68 kDa, indicating the probable presence of BSA in these samples and a very scarce presence of our protein of interest which was not expected to be found in the medium fraction.
Bearing all this in mind, it can be concluded that the transduction of Sf9 cells was successful, as the protein of interest was allegedly produced, although a further study for the actual identification of the protein should be performed, such as a Western blot analysis (Bárcena et al., 2004; Farnós et al., 2009; Marín et al., 1995); this protein was mainly present in cell extracts, rather than released into the medium, and, while its unitary form showed a certain degradation, its aggregate gave no evidence of so, in the absence of further analysis.
5. References
Amanat F., Krammer F., (2020). SARS-Cov-2 Vaccines: Status report. Immunity, 52(4), 583-589.
American Type Culture Collection (2021). Sf9: Spodoptera frugiperda [Internet]. https:// www.lgcstandards-atcc.org/products/all/CRL-1711.aspx?geo_country=es#generalinformation (consulted: 15/03/2021). 
Bárcena J., Verdaguer N., Roca R., Morales M., Angulo I., Risco C., Carrascosa J. L., Torres J. M., Castón J. R. (2004). The coat protein of Rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus contains a molecular switch at the N-terminal region facing the inner surface of the capsid. Virology, 322(1), 118-34.
Beljelarskaya S. N. (2011). Baculovirus expression systems for production of recombinant proteins in insect and mammalian cells. Molecular Biology, 45(1), 123–138.
Berkowitz S. A. (2020). Chromatography (other than size-exclusion chromatography) and electrophoresis. Biophysical Characterization of Proteins in Developing Biopharmaceuticals, 431–456.
Contreras-Gómez A., Sánchez-Mirón A., García-Camacho F., Molina-Grima E., Chisti Y. (2013). Protein production using the baculovirus-insect cell expression system. Biotechnology Progress, 30(1), 1–18.
Di Jeso, B., Arvan, P. (2016). Thyroglobulin From Molecular and Cellular Biology to Clinical Endocrinology. Endocrine Reviews, 37(1), 2–36.
Ernst H. A., Jørgensen L. J., Bukh C., Piontek K., Plattner D. A., Østergaard L. H., Larsen S., Bjerrum M. J. (2018). A comparative structural analysis of the surface properties of asco-laccases. PLoS One, 13(11):e0206589.
Farnós O., Fernández E., Chiong M., Parra F., Joglar M., Méndez L., Rodríguez E., Moya G., Rodríguez D., Lleonart R., González E. M., Alonso A., Alfonso P., Suárez M., Rodríguez M. P., Toledo J. R. (2009). Biochemical and structural characterization of RHDV capsid protein variants produced in Pichia pastoris: advantages for immunization strategies and vaccine implementation. Antiviral Res, 81(1), 25-36.
Fee C. J., Billakanti J. M., Saufi S. M. (2013). Methods for purification of dairy nutraceuticals. Separation, Extraction and Concentration Processes in the Food, Beverage and Nutraceutical Industries, 450–482.
Feng R., Konishi Y., Bell A. W. (1991). High Accuracy Molecular Weight Determination and Variation Characterization of Proteins Up To 80 ku by Ionspray Mass Spectrometry. Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, 2(5), 387–401.
Gibco. 2017. Growth and maintenance of insect cell lines. User Guide. [Internet]. http://tools. thermofisher.com/content/sfs/manuals/Insect_Cell_Lines_UG.pdf (consulted 23/02/2021).
Guarino L. (2011). Baculoviruses. In: eLS. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 1-15.
Hoffmann C., Sandig V., Jennings G., Rudolph M., Schlag P., Strauss M. (1995). Efficient Gene Transfer into Human Hepatocytes by Baculovirus Vectors. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 92(22), 10099-10103.
Hong P., Koza S., Bouvier E. S. P. (2012). A review size exclusion chromatography for the analysis of protein biotherapeutics and their aggregates. Journal of Liquid Chromatography & Related Technologies, 35(20), 2923-2950
Hu Y.C. (2006). Baculovirus vectors for gene therapy. Advances in virus research, 68, 287-320.
Laurent S., Vautherot J. F., Madelaine M. F., Le Gall G., Rasschaert D. (1994). Recombinant Rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus capsid protein expressed in baculovirus self-assembles into viruslike particles and induces protection. Journal of Virology, 68(10), 6794 – 6798.
Lonza. 2021. Insect-XPRESS™ Medium. [Internet]. https://bioscience.lonza.com/lonza_bs/CH/en/ document/30706 (consulted 23/02/2021).
López-Vidal J., Gómez-Sebastián S., Bárcena J., Nuñez M. del C., Martínez-Alonso D., Dudognon B., Guijarro E., Escribano J. M. (2015). Improved Production Efficiency of Virus-Like Particles by the Baculovirus Expression Vector System. PLOS ONE, 10(10), e0140039.
Marín M. S., Martín Alonso J. M., Pérez Ordoyo García L. I., Boga J. A., Arguello-Villares J. L., Casais R., Venugopal K., Jiang W., Gould E. A., Parra F. (1995). Immunogenic properties of Rabbit haemorrhagic disease virus structural protein VP60 expressed by a recombinant baculovirus: an efficient vaccine. Virus Research, 39(2 – 3), 119 – 128.
Merck. 2021a. HPLC Analysis of Thyroglobulin on a SRT® SEC-1000 Gel Filtration Column. [Internet]. https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/technical-documents/articles/analytical-applications/hplc/hplc-analysis-of-thyroglobulin-g006181.html (consulted 16/03/2021).
Merck. 2021b. Superdex® 200 Increase 10/300 GL. [Internet]. https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/product/sigma/ge28990944?lang=es&region=ES (consulted 23/02/2021).
Mesalam A., Lee K. L., Khan I., Chowdhury M. M. R., Zhang S., Song S. H., Joo M. D., Lee J. H., Jin J. I., Kong I. K. (2019). A combination of bovine serum albumin with insulin-transferrin-sodium selenite and/or epidermal growth factor as alternatives to fetal bovine serum in culture medium improves bovine embryo quality and trophoblast invasion by induction of matrix metalloproteinases. Reprod Fertil Dev, 31(2), 333-346.
Miele S. A. B., Garavaglia M. J., Belaich M. N., Ghiringhelli P. D. (2011). Baculovirus: Molecular Insights on Their Diversity and Conservation. International Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 2011, 379424.
Moreno N., Mena I., Angulo I., Gómez Y., Crisci E., Montoya M., Castón J. R., Blanco E., Bárcena J. (2016). Rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus capsid, a versatile platform for foreign B-cell epitope display inducing protective humoral immune responses. Scientific reports, 6, Article number: 31844. 
Parra F., Boga J.A., Marín M.S., Casais R. (1993). The amino sequence of VP60 from rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus supports its putative subgenomic origin. Virus Research, 27, 219–228.
Richter J. F., Pieper R., Zakrzewski S. S., Günzel D., Schulzke J. D., Van Kessel A. G. (2013). Diets high in fermentable protein and fibre alter tight junction protein composition with minor effects on barrier function in piglet colon. British Journal of Nutrition, 111(06), 1040–1049.
Rohrmann G. F. (1986). Polyhedrin Structure. Journal of General Virology, 67(8), 1499–1513.
Sasnauskas K., Buzaite O., Vogel F., Jandrig B., Razanskas R., Staniulis J., Scherneck S., Krüger D. H., Ulrich R. (1999). Yeast cells allow high-level expression and formation of polyomavirus-like particles. Biological Chemistry, 380(3):381-6.
Shaddeau A. W., Schneck N. A., Li Y., Ivleva V. B., Arnold F. J., Cooper J. W., Lei Q. P. (2019). Development of a New Tandem Ion Exchange and Size Exclusion Chromatography Method To Monitor Vaccine Particle Titer in Cell Culture Media. Analytical Chemistry, 91(10), 6430-6434.
Üstün-Aytekin Ö., Gürhan İ. D., Ohura K., Imai T., Öngen G. (2013). Monitoring of the effects of transfection with baculovirus on Sf9 cell line and expression of human dipeptidyl peptidase IV. Cytotechnology, 66(1), 159–168.
Van Oers M. M. (2011). Opportunities and challenges for the baculovirus expression system. J Invertebr Pathol, 107, S3-S15.
Vander Heyden Y., Popovici S. T., Schoenmakers P. J. (2002). Evaluation of size-exclusion chromatography and size-exclusion electrochromatography calibration curves. Journal of Chromatography A, 957(2), 127–137.
Wang X., Xu F., Liu J., Gao B., Liu Y., Zhai Y., Ma J., Zhang K., Baker T. S., Schulten K., Zheng D., Pang H., Sun, F. (2013). Atomic Model of Rabbit Hemorrhagic Disease Virus by Cryo-Electron Microscopy and Crystallography. PLoS Pathogens, 9(1), e1003132.















6. Annexes
Annex I: SDS-PAGE reagents
Stacking gel
Water: 3 mL
pH 6.8 buffer: 1.25 mL
SDS: 0.05 mL
30 % Acrylamide/bis-acrylamide: 0.6 mL
Tetramethylethylenediamine: 0.01 mL
Ammonium persulfate: 0.05 mL
Resolving gel
Water: 3.97 mL
pH 8.8 buffer: 2.5 mL
SDS: 0.1 mL
30 % Acrylamide/bis-acrylamide: 3.33 mL
Tetramethylethylenediamine: 0.02 mL
Ammonium persulfate: 0.1 mL
Electrophoresis running buffer
0.248 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.8
1.92 M Glycine
1 % (w/v) SDS
Dissociation buffer
62.5 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8
2 % (w/v) SDS
2 mM EDTA 
8.75 % (v/v) Glycerol
0.625 % (v/v) β-Mercaptoethanol
0.005 % (w/v) Bromophenol blue
Staining solution
0.25 % (w/v) Coomassie Brilliant Blue R
45 % (v/v) Methanol
10 % (v/v) Acetic acid
Destaining solution
10 % Methanol
7.5 % Acetic acid
Treatment with Methylprednisolone High Dosage
Analysis of the different physiological, genetic and immunological effects of the treatment with a high dose of methylprednisolone to female Wistar rats
______________________________________________________________________
Experimentation in Biotechnology III





Joaquín Fernández Berros, Raúl Fernández Díaz, Pablo Fernández García & Silvia González López
Biotechnology Degree - University of Oviedo
January, 2020

Table of contents
1. Abstract	2
2. Introduction	3
3. Materials and methods	6
3. 1. Biological reactives	6
3. 2. Genotoxicity analysis	7
3. 3. Analysis of lymphocyte subpopulations	9
3. 4. Gene expression of certain genes in liver	10
3. 5. Statistical analyses	11
4. Results	12
4. 1. Analysis of the physiological parameters	12
4. 2. Genotoxicity analysis	20
4. 3. Analysis of lymphocyte subpopulations	21
4. 4. Analysis of the gene expression of certain genes in liver	25
5. Discussion	26
5. 1. Analysis of physiological effects	26
5. 2. Genotoxicity analysis	28
5. 3. Analysis of lymphocyte subpopulations	28
5. 4. Gene expression of certain genes in liver	31
6. Conclusions	33
7. References	33
8. Appendixes	38
8. 1. Appendix I: Physiology Laboratory Protocol	38
8. 2. Appendix II: Immunology Laboratory Protocol	46
8. 3. Appendix III: Genetics Laboratory Protocol	54
8. 4.  Appendix IV: Biochemistry Laboratory Protocol	60
8. 5. Appendix V: PCR Primer Design	70
8. 6. Appendix VI: Mann-Whitney U test results	72
8. 7. Appendix VII: Immunology Data from Low Dose of Methylprednisolone (Subgroup 4)	73


1. Abstract
The aim of this project was to study the effects that an intraperitoneal daily dose of 40 mg/kg body weight of methylprednisolone induces in three female Wistar rats compared to two controls during five days. To do so, parameters regarding their physiological, immunological and genetic state were measured.
The physiological study included daily information on their weight and food and water intake, as well as blood glucose and cholesterol levels before and after the treatment and haematocrit and plasma osmolality measurements after the sacrifice. 
Genotoxicity was studied performing a comet assay to obtain information on the DNA damage present in spleen cell nuclei. 
Gene expression of annexins A2 and A10 in liver was investigated through a RT-PCR followed by a native electrophoresis in polyacrylamide gel.
The immunological effects included the identification of different cells present in the spleen tissue thanks to a flow cytometry analysis with fluorophore-conjugated monoclonal antibodies against CD3, CD4 and CD25 in order to identify T helper, T cytotoxic and regulatory T cells, their activation and apoptotic state, and the T cell receptor mutation rate.
The results obtained from these analysis showed few significant differences, namely, a lower diminution of water intake, higher blood cholesterol level and a reduced number of activated T cytotoxic cells in treated rats compared to controls, with no remarkable variations in the rest of the evaluated parameters.
Key words: Methylprednisolone, physiological, genotoxicity, gene expression, immunological, immunosuppression.





2. Introduction
Methylprednisolone (MP) is a synthetic glucocorticosteroid usually prescribed as an antiinflammatory or immunosuppressive agent, shown in Figure 1. It acts as an agonist for the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), which is a member of the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily of ligand-activated transcription factors. In the cytoplasm, unliganded GR exists as a multi-protein heterocomplex associated with an Hsp90 dimer, a p23 stabilizing protein and various immunophilin chaperone proteins (Pratt, 1996). Thus, when MP binds to the heterocomplex, the GR is released and translocated to the nucleus which, in turn, modifies the transcription and protein synthesis inducing a wide range of responses. Among them is important to highlight the inhibition of the leukocyte infiltration, interference with inflammatory mediators and suppression of humoral immunity (Davies, 2002; Hermoso, 2003; Wishart, 2017). 

Figure 1. Methylprednisolone chemical structure. PubChem, NCBI (NCBI, 2020).
A common dose for Wistar rats (Rattus norvegicus), based on different studies, is around 30 mg/kg body weight (Christie, 2008; Martus 2010; Oudega, 2008; Xu, 1998). In this study, the effects of a high dose of MP in rats has been analyzed at three different levels: a) physiological, b) genetic and c) immunological. 
At a physiological level, a diverse array of parameters such as thirst, hunger, weight, haematocrit, blood cholesterol and glucose concentrations and plasma osmolality have been monitored so as to spot any significant changes that may be caused by the treatment. MP is known to cause increments in glucose levels, as it stimulates hepatic gluconeogenesis, and thus, promotes hyperglycemia (McKay, 2003). Corticosteroids can also suppress phagocytic activity against erythrocytes and, therefore, their administration may result in an increased haematocrit. Additionally, glucocorticoids are thought to reduce osmotically stimulated ADH (Antidiuretic Hormone) secretion, resulting in an increased plasma osmolality (Bähr, 2006).
Moreover, glucocorticoids are traditionally thought to modify lipid metabolism, though more recent articles have concluded that their effect is primarily related to an increase in HDL (High-Density Lipoprotein) concentration in the organism, rather than a change in total cholesterol levels (Schroeder, 2014). Furthermore, they are also known for promoting water intake, although this effect is not remarkable unless they are administered along with mineralocorticoids. In that case, they can also cause fluid retention, which in turn may result in increased body weight (Thunhorst, 2007). Finally, whether food intake is increased or decreased following glucocorticoid administration is object of debate with different studies offering counterposed data (Dallman, 2004; Liu, 2011).
It is important to take into account that most corticosteroids possess to some extent both mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid activities. Thereby, even though some of the effects described above for corticoids are, in fact, more characteristic of mineralocorticoids (mainly those related to electrolyte and fluid balance), MP could also present them to a certain degree.
At a genetic level, only two parameters were deemed relevant enough as to be studied, namely genotoxicity in spleen tissue and gene expression of the genes for annexins A2 and A10 in liver tissue. 
In the case of genotoxicity, there has not been found any evidence that MP may have any genotoxicity relevant to murine health. Major adverse effects of MP observed are merely related to its nature as an immunosuppressant, namely reduced counts of leukocytes and smaller spleens. Methylprednisolone contains no alert chemical structure for known carcinogens, so MP-associated cancer has not been reported for more than 50 years of clinical experience (FSCJ, 2016).
On the other hand, MP has been shown to alter the gene expression of annexin A2 in rats (Peers, 1993). Annexin A2 is a calcium-regulated membrane binding protein whose affinity for calcium is greatly enhanced by anionic phospholipids (Seidah, 2012). According to The Human Protein Atlas (THPA) database, its expression is ubiquitous with a low tissue specificity which ensures that it will be present in liver tissue (THPA, 2020). Similarly, annexin A10, as a member of the annexin family, is a calcium-dependent phospholipid-binding protein. It plays a role in the regulation of cellular growth and in signal transduction pathways (Li, 2018). However, its expression is much more tissue specific being found mostly in gallbladder and stomach (THPA, 2020), therefore, it is not expected to be found in liver tissue.
Finally, at an immunological level, a variety of parameters were considered. Firstly, the concentrations of different types of lymphocytes such as CD4+, CD8+, or CD25+. Then, the concentration of clones of CD4+ lymphocytes that may have mutated TCRs (T Cell Receptors), although through indirect measurements: any CD4+ lymphocyte that was simultaneously CD3- was considered mutant, because such pattern of expression is extremely uncommon in normal cells. Moreover, the concentration of activated immune cells and the ratio between healthy and apoptotic cells in spleen tissue were also considered. The main objective is to determine the difference in the proportions of CD4+, CD8+ and regulatory T cells (Treg) between the treated animals and the controls. 
Regulatory T cell population may be increased by treatment with glucocorticoids. It has been proven that a high dose of MP can increase the expression of the transcription factor Foxp3 and could induce the expansion of CD4+ CD25+ Treg cells in an early and transient fashion (i.e. seen as soon as 24 hours after the first dose and then not present 8 days later) (Braitch, 2009; Mathian, 2015). Moreover, after treatment with MP the reduction of the CD8+ and CD4+ populations is expected (Fan, 2019).
On a related note, steroids, generally, increase levels of Treg associated IL-10, which acts as an antiinflammatory agent (Gayo, 1998). MP can also induce apoptosis (Leussink, 2001), although murine regulatory T cells are known to be more resistant to glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis (Chen, 2004).
Glucocorticoids affect in different ways to T helper cells (CD4+) depending on their cytokine release pattern. Th1 cells are induced to apoptosis and cytokine suppression, Th2 cells are sensitive to the latter but not to the former, and Th17 cells are resistant to both, although there is little certainty on the mechanisms underlying this specificity (Banuelos, 2016). This apoptotic effect can be observed as well in T cytotoxic cells  (Migliorati, 1994). Additionally, there is evidence of a reduction in the ratio of T helper CD4+/T cytotoxic CD8+ cells after administration of some glucocorticoids, like cortisone (Brohee, 1990).
So, after careful consideration of the consulted literature, it is expected that treatment with a high dose of MP will cause a significant suppression of the immune system in Wistar rats, paired with a representative expansion of regulatory T cells, and an increment in blood glucose levels.
3. Materials and methods
3. 1. Biological reactives
The treatment was administered to a group of three female Wistar rats. Two female Wistar rats constituted the control group. The dosage was set at 40 mg of methylprednisolone per kg of body weight so as to have a high enough dosage without endangering the health of the rats. Concentrations up to 50 mg/kg had already been proven to be safe for rats (Ayyar VS, 2018; Ayyar VS, 2019; Hesterberg TW, 1981). Furthermore, its LD50 for intraperitoneal administration in rats is 100 mg/kg (Wishart, 2016). The drug was introduced through intraperitoneal injection daily for five days from a MP solution (20 mg/mL) prepared at the beginning of the treatment (cf. Appendix I - Section 3). The control group received a water injection of the corresponding volume. These intraperitoneal injections had to not exceed a 0.5 mL volume. Weight, food and water intake were monitored daily throughout the treatment (cf. Appendix I - Section 8). 
Glycemia, cholesterol concentration and haematocrit were determined for each of the rats before and after treatment, so as to determine with more precision the magnitude of the changes. In order to obtain blood samples for these analyses, their tails were nicked (cf. Appendix I - Section 9). The rats were anesthetized beforehand by exposure to isoflurane at concentrations between 3 and 5% (cf. Appendix I - Section 4) for a controlled time. Cholesterol and glucose were measured using Accutrend® Cholesterol and Accu-Check® Aviva reactive strips respectively alongside their corresponding measurers. Haematocrit was measured by centrifuging glass capillaries containing blood and some heparin (to prevent clotting) and measuring the percentage of erythrocytes from the total volume of blood using a grade (cf. Appendix I - Section 9).
Once treatment was completed, the animals were euthanized using 0.2 mL of a pentobarbital solution (the approximate dose was 200 mg/kg body weight) administered through intraperitoneal injection (cf. Appendix I - Section 5). Then, longitudinal incisions were performed into their peritoneal cavities through the midline exposing their bowels. Approximately 100 mg of liver were extracted with sterilized material so as to not contaminate the sample with RNAses and then promptly frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored in a refrigerator at -72 ºC. The whole spleens were also removed and kept in a PBS solution (pH = 7.4) in ice, taking care to avoid losing any mass during the extraction. Finally, another longitudinal incision was performed through their thoracic cavity exposing the heart. Around 1 mL of blood was extracted directly through heart puncture and stored in a 2.5 mL vial with a droplet of heparin to avoid coagulation (cf. Appendix I - Sections 6 and 7). Afterwards, they were centrifuged to isolate the plasma (which was stored in ice) in order to measure the plasma osmolality with a vapor pressure osmometer. Student’s t-tests were conducted in order to determine whether the changes observed before and after the treatment or between control and treated groups were significant.
3. 2. Genotoxicity analysis
The genotoxicity analysis studied the DNA damage present in spleen mononuclear cells. The damage was measured with a comet assay. This assay is a simple, cheap, and effective technique to measure different kinds of DNA damage like single and double strand breaks, apurinic and apyrimidinic sites, DNA cross-links, base and base-pair damages, and apoptotic nuclei. Cells are going to be embedded in agarose and then treated with a hypertonic lysis solution and with a non-ionic detergent so as to remove their cell membranes, cytoplasm, nucleoplasm, and to dissolve nucleosomes. Then, they are to be treated with a high alkaline solution to expose alkali labile sites (apurinic and apyrimidinic sites) which will appear as breaks. Such breaks migrate towards the anode when exposed to current during electrophoresis thereby producing a ‘comet’-like appearance, hence the name of the assay (Nandhakumar, 2011).
In the case of this experiment, ten slides were prepared, two per spleen, in order to ensure a more accurate result. Each slide was coated with a normal melting point (NMP) agarose 0.5%. Spleen tissue was disaggregated mechanically and resuspended in a PBS (Phosphate Buffered Saline). Then, mononuclear cells were isolated from the cellular suspension using a density gradient. The gradient was created with the Ficoll-Hypaque method (cf. Appendix II - Section 2). 
Each slide needed to contain approximately 100,000 cells. So, the concentration of each sample was determined using a hemocytometer (viz. a Neubauer chamber). Then, the samples were diluted or re-concentrated, as the situation demanded (cf. Appendix II - Section 3).
Afterwards, the cells were embedded in low melting point (LMP) agarose 1%, so as to produce a suspension with a final LMP concentration of 0.67%. Once both agarose layers on the slide were completely dry, the coverslips used for spreading the embedding agarose all over the slides were removed and the slides were submerged in the lysis solution. Once the lysis step was completed, the slides were submerged in cold denaturing buffer and the electrophoresis was run at a low voltage without exceeding 300 mA (cf. Appendix III - Section 1). The intensity was controlled by the volume of electrophoresis buffer added to the chamber.   
Once the electrophoresis was finished, the slides were washed three times in neutralization buffer (cf. Appendix III - Section 1), submerged in ethanol and then left to dry for almost 24 hours. With the slides completely dried, some drops of staining solution containing ethidium bromide and Vectashield©️ (a product to preserve fluorescence) were added onto them and extended homogeneously on the slides with a coverslip.
The study of the slides required the use of a fluorescence microscope and a specialized analysis program known as Komet 5©. With the microscope, at least 50 images of the nuclei were taken from each slide which amounts to approximately 500 images. Subsequently, Komet 5© was used to process the results and to determine the amount of DNA damage present in the samples. To obtain statistically significant results Student’s t-test (parametric) and Mann-Whitney U test (non-parametric) were performed.
3. 3. Analysis of lymphocyte subpopulations
In order to study the immunological effects of the treatment, spleen mononuclear cells were characterized by their phenotypic markers. Those phenotypic markers were: CD3, exclusively present in T cells, CD4 characteristic of T helper cells, and CD25, expressed in activated lymphocytes (Abbas, 2017). The samples used were the remaining cellular suspensions obtained from the mechanical disaggregation of the spleens (using the plunger end of a syringe) and the subsequent isolation of the mononuclear cells through the Ficoll-Hypaque method (cf. Appendix II - Section 1). 
The Ficoll-Hypaque solution was mixed with the cell suspension and then centrifuged. Afterwards, the mononuclear layer was extracted with a Pasteur pipette into a new tube and centrifuged again in order to discard the supernatant and obtain only the cells. They were then resuspended in PBS (cf. Appendix II - Section 2). A small sample of each of these suspensions was taken and re-diluted with PBS and put into a Neubauer chamber.
The Neubauer chamber was used to analyze the concentration of cells in each suspension. This allowed us to, as well as to calculate the necessary dilutions for the comet assay, observe the quantitative differences regarding the presence/absence of cells in the different spleens (cf. Appendix II - Section 3).
This analysis required the use of a flow cytometer combined with fluorophore-conjugated antibodies namely mouse mAb anti-rat CD3-APC, CD4-PE and CD25-FITC (cf. Appendix II - Subsection 4.2). Given that cells themselves irradiate certain fluorescence, one negative control solution for each spleen sample with just the cells and another one with cells and all the fluorophore-conjugated antibodies were analyzed in the flow cytometer, based on the size, complexity and fluorescence characteristics of each cell.
Apart from these phenotypic analyses, the apoptotic/healthy cell rate was also studied adding propidium iodide (Lakshmanan, 2013) to the cell suspension and introducing the mixture into the flow cytometer (cf. Appendix II - Subsection 4.2.3).
Once this procedure was carried out, the data allowed the study of the TCR mutant cells frequency. These cells are CD3- CD4+ and the mutation rate is calculated dividing the number of these type of cells by the total CD4+. The mutation rate was calculated with the following formula:
M=CD3-CD4+CD3+CD4++ CD3-CD4+
The results obtained from treated and control rats were analyzed performing Student’s t-tests.
3. 4. Gene expression of certain genes in liver
The gene expression of certain genes in liver was measured from the 100 mg sample collected from the biological reactives (cf. Appendix I - Sections 6 and 7). The sample was kept, as described above, frozen at -72 ºC. Firstly, mechanical disaggregation of the sample was conducted with an sterilized glass rod while the sample was still frozen. Then, they were resuspended in TRI Reagent®. To ensure a proper homogenization, the samples were shaken vigorously and centrifuged. Afterwards, the upper aqueous phase (containing mostly RNA) was isolated and mixed with 2-propanol. Subsequently, another centrifugation was carried out, the supernatant was discarded and the RNA precipitate washed with 75% glacial ethanol. Then, it was centrifuged once again. The supernatant was discarded and, to ensure that it was completely removed from the sample, the tube was kept in an oven until the pellet was totally dry. An appropriate volume of Milli-Q® water was added depending on the size of the remaining pellet so as to allow its complete resuspension without any more dilution than necessary (cf. Appendix IV - Section 2).  
After an appropriate dilution, absorbance measurements of the samples were taken using an Eppendorf 6131 BioPhotometer Spectrophotom® at 230, 260, 280, and 320 nm.
The next step was to synthesize the complementary DNA by reverse transcription. To carry out so, an appropriate amount of the solution containing the RNA was mixed with an oligo(dT)18 primer and water up to a certain volume and incubated for 5 minutes. Once the incubation period was over, certain volumes of reaction buffer, RNase inhibitor, dNTPs and reverse transcriptase were added to the tube containing the RNA and centrifuged briefly.
After incubating the mixture for an hour, the synthesis was terminated by heating the tubes at 70 °C (cf. Appendix IV - Section 3).
Consequently, a PCR to amplificate annexins A2 and A10 cDNAs was carried out, adding appropriate volumes of PCR buffer, MgCl2, dNTPs, forward and reverse primers, Taq DNA polymerase and the template DNA to a 500 μL microcentrifuge tube and subjecting it to typical cycling parameters for a PCR once the mixture was briefly centrifuged so as to properly mix all the components (cf. Appendix IV - Section 4). Given that two genes (Rattus norvegicus annexins A2 and A10) were object of study, two PCR mixes were prepared for each sample with the appropriate primers (cf. Appendix V - Section 1).
After the PCR cycles were over, a polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) was carried out in order to study the presence or absence of both studied cDNAs in the sample. Once the gels were prepared, they were placed into a vertical electrophoresis chamber filled with Tris Borate EDTA buffer. The samples and two negative controls with no DNA were mixed with loading gel buffer 
One of the columns was loaded with a size marker (ΦX174 DNA - Hae III Digest), that ranged from 72 to 1,353 base pairs (Thermo Scientific, 2020).
The electrophoresis was run until the dye front reached the bottom of the gel and the gels were separated from their glass plates and introduced in an ethidium bromide solution, so as to be observed at an UV transilluminator (cf. Appendix IV - Section 5).
3. 5. Statistical analyses 
There were mainly two statistical analyses used to process the data generated during this study. Namely, Student’s t-test (parametric) and Mann-Whitney U test (non-parametric).
Student’s t-test is used to compare the means of two groups. T-tests are a type of parametric method which can only be used when the samples satisfy the conditions of normality, homoscedasticity and independence. They may be divided into two categories: paired t-tests when the groups compared are dependent on each other (e.g. the same group before and after treatment) and independent t-tests when the two groups are isolated from one another (e.g. two different groups subjected to different treatments) (Kim, 2015).  
The other statistical tool used was the Mann-Whitney U test, which is conceptually similar to the t-test and can be used to determine whether two sampled groups are different from each other. Whereas t-test is a parametric method, Mann-Whitney U is non-parametric therefore it assumes no specific distribution which means that it does not require normality from the variables at study. It does require independence within and between the groups though. 
The main objective of this test is, fundamentally, to compare all the values in one group with those in another. The U is a counter of every time the former group had a higher value than the latter (Mann, 1947). This test was primarily used to compare the DNA tails in the comet assay to determine whether there is a significant difference between the control and treated samples, given that they do not follow a normal distribution. 
We have considered significant those p-values below 0.05.
4. Results
4. 1. Analysis of the physiological parameters
To analyze the physiological effects of the treatment different parameters were studied. One of them was the evolution of the weight of the rats at the beginning of each day, which is represented in Figure 2.
In order to analyze the possible effects of the treatment on this parameter, the difference among the initial and final weights was divided by the initial values so as to obtain a relative, more accurate measure and then converted to a percentage. The results are shown in Figure 3. A Student’s t-test was used to compare the mean weights of control and treated rats and it showed no significant difference between both groups.
Figure 2. Graphical representation of the evolution of the weights of the rats throughout the treatment. The error displayed corresponds to the standard deviation of the groups for each particular day.



Figure 3. Porcentual weight change in rats at the beginning and at the end of the treatment. The error displayed corresponds to the standard deviation for each group.



Water and food intake were also a matter of study. For the former, a study of its magnitude day by day is shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4. Representation of water intake of rats relative to their weight throughout the treatment. The error displayed corresponds to the standard deviation of the groups for each particular day.


Figure 5. Water intake relative to body weight change in rats at the beginning and at the end of the treatment. The ‘**’ shows a p-value under 0.01. The error displayed corresponds to the standard deviation for each group. 

So, to analyse the statistical significance of this effect, the variation of water intake between the first and last days of treatment was considered. The results are shown above in Figure 5. A Student’s t-test was then used to compare control and treated rats and it showed significant difference between both groups, with a p-value of 0.003; this means that the reduction of water intake in controls (- 16.58 mL/kg body weight) was consistently steeper than in treated rats (- 0.33 mL/kg body weight).
On a related note, the evolution of food intake in relation to the weight of the rats throughout the treatment is shown in Figure 6.

Figure 6. Representation of food intake of rats relative to their weight throughout the treatment. The error displayed corresponds to the standard deviation of the groups for each particular day.

In order to study if there is significant difference between the changes in food intake for control and treated rats, they were calculated in relation to their body weight and presented in Figure 7. Those changes were analyzed using a Student’s t-test that showed no statistical difference among them.
Blood glucose and cholesterol levels were also measured and studied in treated rats at the first day of the treatment, before administering the first MP dose, and at the last day of experimentation. The data corresponding to these measurements is shown in Figure 8. An statistical study performing a Student’s t-test showed no significant difference between the blood glucose levels of treated rats at the beginning and at the end of the treatment. Similarly, a statistical study with Student’s t-test was performed on the different glycemia levels for treated and control rats the last day of treatment, although it showed no significant difference among both groups. This data is shown in Figure 9.

Figure 7. Food intake relative to body weight change in rats at the beginning and at the end of the treatment. The error displayed corresponds to the standard deviation for each group.


Figure 8. Graphical representation of the glycemia levels for the treated rats at the end and at the beginning of the treatment. The error displayed corresponds to the standard deviation of each group.


Figure 9. Graphical representation of the glycemia levels of both  treated and control rats at the end of the treatment. The error displayed corresponds to the standard deviation of each group.


Figure 10. Graphical representation of the blood cholesterol levels for treated rats at the end and at the beginning of the treatment. The ‘*’ shows a p-value under 0.05. The error displayed corresponds to the standard deviation for each group.

Blood cholesterol levels were measured following the same protocol as aforementioned. In regards to the difference in blood cholesterol levels in treated rats before and after the treatment (presented above in Figure 10), a Student’s t-test, with a p-value of 0.049, showed that the level at day 6 (162.7 mg/dL) is significantly higher than at day 1 (153.7 mg/dL).
The other analysis performed on blood cholesterol levels is a comparison between the ones from treated rats to the ones from control rats at the last day of treatment, whose data is shown in Figure 11. The statistical study with Student’s t-test showed no significant difference between the two groups.
Another parameter that was measured in order to study the physiological effects of MP treatment in rats was the haematocrit (percentage of erythrocytes in blood). The data corresponding to the comparison of the haematocrit between control and treated rats the last day of treatment is shown in Figure 12. No statistically significant difference was found with the Student’s t-test.


Figure 11. Graphical representation of blood cholesterol levels for both treated and control rats at the end of the treatment. The error displayed corresponds to the standard deviation for each of the groups.

The last aspect studied among the possible physiological effects was the plasma osmolality. This parameter was measured in both treated and control rats at the end of the treatment and the results are shown in Figure 13. After a statistical Student’s t-test study, no significant difference was found between control and treated rats.

Figure 12. Graphical representation of the haematocrit for both treated and control rats at the end of the treatment. The error displayed corresponds to the standard deviation for the treated rats.


Figure 13. Graphical representation of the plasma osmolality for both the treated and the control rats at the end of the treatment. The error displayed corresponds to the standard deviation for each of the groups.

4. 2. Genotoxicity analysis
The percentage of tail DNA provides a measure of the amount of DNA damage present in the cells. Tail DNA damage does not follow a normal distribution and cannot be directly analysed with Student’s t-test, instead a Mann-Whitney U test is required to analyse whether both controls belonged to the same group and whether the treated rats samples belonged to the same group. All the results of this analysis can be found on Appendix VI. The main conclusion obtained was that there was no significant difference within the control group (Appendix VI - Section 1) nor there was any significant difference within the treated group (Appendix VI - Section 2). Thereby, means from both the control and treated groups were calculated. 
Means do follow a normal distribution so it is appropriate to compare them using Student’s t-test in order to determine if there is a significant difference between the samples from the control rats and those from the treated ones. This comparison is illustrated in Figure 14. The statistical analysis of the measurements with Student’s t-test showed no significant difference between the control and the treated samples.

Figure 14. Comparison of the DNA Tail Percentage between Control and Treated liver samples. Student’s t-test with α = 0.05 showed no significant changes (p = 0.056). The error displayed corresponds to the standard deviation for each of the groups.

4. 3. Analysis of lymphocyte subpopulations
The flow cytometry results were analyzed using a computer program that shows every studied cell as a point in a plot. The position of each cell in those graphics depend on their complexity, size, fluorescence, et cetera; and allowed us to determine to which of the discussed categories it corresponded, as shown in Figure 15.
This analysis created a considerable amount of data, namely number of viable cells, T-cells, T helper (Th), T cytotoxic (Tc), activated Th cells, activated Tc cells, regulatory T cells, apoptotic cells and, TCR mutated cells, which are summarised in Table 1. 
Table 1. Flow cytometry results. All data is a percentage related to the number of T-cells except the proportion of viable cells that depends on the total number of cells and the TCR mutated T-cells proportion that depends on the number of CD4+ cells. Code: T helper cells (Th), T cytotoxic cells (Tc), Th CD25+ cells (Th25+), Activated Tc (Tc25+), regulatory T cells (Th25h), activated Th cells (Th25l), apoptotic cells (IP).


Viable cells
T- cells
Th
Tc
Th25+
Th25h
Th25l
Tc25+
Th/Tc
TCR mutants
IP
Mean treated rats
47.35
34.60
61.83
37.16
4.90
1.15
3.87
1.27
1.77
14.32
4.09
Standard deviation 
7.70
13.26
8.50
8.33
1.94
0.439
1.60
0.80
0.719
5.51
2.61
Mean control rats
63.07
33.65
66.51
32.16
3.53
2.58
2.58
34.04
2.09
11.15
1.67
Standard deviation
5.44
6.85
3.70
4.25
0.359
0.583
0.583
5.95
0.392
0.592
0.933


As we can see in Figure 16, treatment with MP has caused a diminution in the number of Th cells. The percentage has fallen from 66.51% in the control rats to 61.83% in the treated rats. However, Student’s t-test  showed no significant difference with a p-value of 0.53.

Figure 15. Plots resulting from the flow cytometry analysis. A: Side Scatter vs Forward Scatter for separation of viable cells from breeze. B: Side Scatter vs CD3 expression for identification of T cells (CD3+). C: CD4 expression vs CD3 expression for identification of TCR mutant cells (CD3-CD4+), Th and Tc. D: CD4 expression vs CD25 expression for identification of activated T cells (CD25low) and Treg cells (CD25high). E: Side Scatter vs IP expression for identification of apoptotic cells (IP+).


Figure 16. Graphical representation of Th cell population in the control and treated rats. The error displayed corresponds to the standard deviation for each of the groups.
On a related note, Tc cell population has not shown a reduction after the treatment, however, the percentage of activated Tc cells (CD25+) has. As can be seen in Figure 17, the proportion of activated Tc cells from the control rats was 34.04%, while in the treated ones this proportions falls to 1.27%. This result has a p-value of 0.0020, so it constitutes a significant difference.

Figure 17. Graphical representation of the proportion of activated Tc cells in control and treated rats. The ‘**’ shows a p-value under 0.01. The error displayed corresponds to the standard deviations for each of the groups.

Figure 18. Graphical representation of the proportion of TCR mutated cells among the CD4+ cells. The error displayed corresponds to the standard deviation for each group.

As has been mentioned the TCR mutation was measured indirectly, considering all cells that were simultaneously CD4+ and CD3- as mutants. Therefore, the mutation rate was calculated as the proportion of CD3- CD4+ cells among all CD4+. The mutation rate increased from 11.15% to 14.32% (Figure 18). However, this increment was not significant. 
The proportion of apoptotic cells was also measured using propidium iodide (IP). A slight increase was observed, from 1.67% to 4.09%, though it was not significant. Figure 19 shows with more clarity these results. Finally, the ratio of T helper CD4+/T cytotoxic CD8+ showed a non-significant diminution from 2.09% to 1.77%, as can be seen in Figure 20.

Figure 19. Graphical representation of the proportion of  apoptotic population in control and treated rats. The error displayed corresponds to the standard deviation for each of the groups.


Figure 20. Graphical representation of the Th/Tc ratio proportion in control and treated rats. The error displayed corresponds to the standard deviation for each of the groups.
4. 4. Analysis of the gene expression of certain genes in liver
Before studying the gene expression using a polyacrylamide gel, the amount of RNA present in each sample was measured in order to be able to carry out the complementary DNA synthesis using a spectrophotometer. The absorbances and concentrations obtained are shown in Table 2.
Table 2. Absorbances and RNA concentration of samples corresponding to treated rat no. 1 and the control rat after purification of total RNA


A230 nm
A260 nm
A280 nm
A320 nm
A260 nm/A280 nm
A260 nm/A230 nm
RNA concentration (μg/mL) (1:100)
Control rat
0.360
0.440
0.260
0.014
1.69
1.22
17.6
Treated rat 1
0.551
0.369
0.224
0.039
1.65
0.67
14.8


As has been previously established, the genes whose expression was to be studied were annexins A2 and A10. The image of the resultant polyacrylamide gel labeled with the samples corresponding to each well is shown in Figure 21.

Figure 21. Image of the resultant polyacrylamide after the electrophoresis and subsequent staining with ethidium bromide, showing the samples loaded in each well.

In this image, no trace of DNA can be seen in the columns corresponding to samples with no DNA content at all (negative controls). 
The columns corresponding to samples which presumably had cDNA from either control or treated rats do have visible traces. While those samples which originally contained primers for the amplification of annexin A10 do not show clear bands at all in the gel, those corresponding to the PCR amplification of A2 do present one band at 194 to 234 base pairs.
5. Discussion
5. 1. Analysis of physiological effects
Diverse aspects regarding the physiological conditions of the rats were taken into account, but few gave significant results regarding differences between the control and treated groups.
In the first place, weight was expected to present a slight and steady increase given that they were still maturing, but neither control nor treated rats experienced significant changes; not only that, but the tendence during the first days was negative, which could be associated to the stress that may have been caused by their new environment and the manipulation they were subjected to. Fluid retention appears mainly with mineralocorticoid treatments and, given that MP is primarily a glucocorticoid no effect was expected to be seen after five days of treatment and none was observed. 
The same reasoning applies to water intake which is induced by mineralocorticoids. However, even though this effect was not expected, a significant difference between the progression of water intake in control and treated rats was found, showing that control rats decreased their water intake much more remarkably than treated ones. Although, a closer look to the tendency showed that the water intake of the treated rats followed a curve quite similar to the one for the controls, suggesting that there was no real difference between their water intake patterns.
Food intake did not show significant differences and, according to the consulted references, no consensus on this concern has been achieved yet, with counterposed data from different studies (Dallman, 2004; Liu, 2011).
Blood glucose and cholesterol levels were also measured. For the former, no significant differences were found neither between control and treated rats the last day of treatment nor between treated rats before and after it. Articles consulted to this respect showed a significant hyperglycemia in patients under a MP treatment (Támez-Pérez, 2015; Tanaka, 2018), but there were many differences between Tanaka’s study and the present: the individuals were humans, not rats, and they suffered from thyroid ophthalmopathy (an autoimmune disease), even though they did have normal glucose tolerance. Furthermore, the administration was intravenous, not intraperitoneal, and three days a week for three weeks. That article insisted that the hyperglycemic effects of MP was noticeable mainly right after each meal (postprandial hyperglycemia), factor that could not be taken into account for our determinations given that  the time of the last meal of the rats was not properly determined. This can also explain the enormous standard deviation in the glycemia levels in rats on the last day of treatment, as they were not fastened before taking the samples and they all could have eaten at different times.
Blood cholesterol levels, however, did show significant differences between treated rats before and after the five day long treatment; though, no significant differences were found between the control and treated groups the last day of treatment.
 In a study following the lipid profile of patients under a prednisone equivalent treatment (Schroeder, 2014), no significant change in total cholesterol levels was found, although an increase in HDL levels was detected. Given that our cholesterol level determination measured the amount of free cholesterol in blood, our result could mean either an increase in total cholesterol levels or a reduction in HDL levels, which would mean less cholesterol associated to lipoproteins and, in return more of it free in blood. Neither of these effects corresponds to the results obtained in the aforementioned article, but different aspects of their procedure differ from ours: the study was conducted in humans suffering from rheumatoid arthritis and they received oral glucocorticoids, instead of intraperitoneal injections, daily for three months.
Haematocrit was also measured at the beginning and at the end of the treatment but, unfortunately, some technical difficulties impeded to register most measurements from the first day of treatment and the study could only be carried out comparing the three treated rats to just one control on the last day of treatment. No significant differences were found between those groups, although the bibliography suggested an increase in haematocrit due to the depression of the immune system, that should reduce erythrophagocytosis and therefore increase the percentage of red blood cells in blood (McKay, 2003).
Finally, no difference between plasma osmolality of control and treated rats was found on the last day of treatment. Studies carried out in humans experimentally show that prednisolone inhibits osmotically stimulated ADH secretion and, in turn, increases plasma osmolality (Bähr, 2006), but the methods of this experiment have notable differences with ours, given that the subjects were humans and the prednisolone is administered orally, though their treatment was shorter than ours, as it lasted only 4 days.
5. 2. Genotoxicity analysis
The comet assay data obtained was analysed with the Mann-Whitney U test. It concluded that there were not significant differences among the control group nor among the treated group. Student’s t-test could not be used provided that tail DNA does not follow a normal distribution. The Mann-Whitney test tough, as a non-parametric test, does not have such restrictions.
However, Student’s t-test was used to compare the mean values of both groups in order to determine if the treatment changed significantly the induction of DNA damage. In this case, the use of Student’s test was appropriate, as means do follow a normal distribution. Anyhow, the analysis concluded that there was not a significant change, though by a slight margin (p = 0.056), which is consistent with the consulted literature that established that MP does not induce DNA damage (FSCJ, 2016). It is important to note that even if our results are consistent with the articles consulted the conditions of our study are different to the ones they used.
5. 3. Analysis of lymphocyte subpopulations
There are many different parameters that were taken into consideration when analysing the immunological effects of the MP treatment. The main focus of this study is to determine whether the immune system has been suppressed by MP administration or not. Although there are many ways in which that suppression may be measured or observed, the easiest, but perhaps less accurate, approach will be to study directly the proportion of T-cells. However, there is not a significant difference between control and treated rats, so we have to move on to the next parameter, namely proportion of T CD4+ or CD8+ cells. 
With regards to the CD4+ proportion, there was a slight decrease even though it was not significant. Within the CD4+ cells, the CD25+ were carefully examined and subdivided into two categories: low and high expression. Low expression of CD25 would be related to activated Th cells, whilst high expression would be related to regulatory T cells. A disminution of activated Th cells or an increase of Treg cells would constitute a strong indicator of immunosuppression. Nevertheless, neither experiment a significant change and even the proportion of activated Th cells showed a slight tendency to increase. In any case, the distinction between high and low CD25 expression was close to arbitrary and to properly determine whether a certain subgroup of cells was actually Treg or activated Th another flow cytometry should have been performed 4 days after the first one. In that time, activated Th cells would have disappeared whilst the Treg would have remained, thus, allowing their identification.
Moving on to the CD8+ population, firstly it is important to take into account that there was not a specific antibody used against CD8, so this measure is indirect and depends on the CD4 analysis. Fundamentally, all the cells that were CD3+ and CD4- have been considered to be CD8+ which may be misleading. Anyway, there was not a significant change and the tendency that the data displayed insinuated a slight increase which would be unexpected. However, when studying the proportion of activated Tc cells, (CD3+CD4-CD25+) a significant decrease (-32.77%) was found (p = 0.002) which is consistent with results obtained by Longhi (Longhi, 2005) and Fan (Fan, 2019) that established a reduction of the Tc cell population after corticosteroid treatment. Although these studies showed that this reduction was due to the promotion of Treg proliferation, this study found no evidence to support such cause-effect relation as the proportion of Treg cells did not show any significant changes. It is important to note that those studies were carried out in humans whereas this study was conducted exclusively in rats. 
The ratio between T helper and T cytotoxic cells (Th/Tc ratio) is another parameter that has to be taken into consideration when analysing the state of the immune system. In this case, there was not a significant change between treated and control samples even though the data showed a certain tendency to diminish which would be consistent with the literature consulted (Brohee, 1990; Pountain, 1993). 
On a related note, the proportion of apoptotic cells is also an interesting aspect to discuss because it could explain, to an extent, why there were no significant changes on the other parameters. The reasoning would be that all the changes are calculated in relation to the the total number of T-cells with a few exceptions (viz. the proportion of viable cells, of T-cells themselves and the TCR mutants). Anyhow, even though the data did show a certain tendency to grow, it could not be considered as significant. This is consistent with the literature that expects some degree of increment in the number of apoptotic cells (Banuelos, 2016; Migliorati, 1994), though it could also be explained by the fact that the samples were kept in a refrigerator for a day before the flow cytometry.
Finally, the proportion of cells with a mutant TCR was estimated as the proportion of CD4+CD3- cells. As CD4+ cells are usually expected to also present a functioning CD3, this approximation is accurate enough. Data showed no significant changes, even though, as in other cases, a slight tendency to increase was observed. This is consistent with previous works that have established that MP can have an apoptotic effect in different types of immune cells, like Tc cells and Th1 (Banuelos, 2016; Migliorati, 1994).
Until now, the discussion of results has been limited to the data collected throughout this study and the data from scientific literature. However, now the data from Subgroup IV (David Cordero, Natalia Cuervo, Patricia del Campo, and Daniel Fabriani) is going to be also taken into consideration (cf. Appendix VII). Their study followed the same protocols as ours though they used a lower dose of MP (viz. 20 mg/kg). This comparison will help contextualize the results obtained. In this case, only the significant results will be discussed.
As before, the discussion will begin with the Th population which diminished (-16.32%) in the rats treated with the high dosage compared to those treated with the lower one (p = 0.035). This result is consistent with the study carried out by Fan (Fan, 2019) about the immunosuppressive effect of MP. It is also consistent with the fact that the rats that received a higher dosage of MP experimented a steeper reduction of their Th population.
However, Tc population did not decrease. In fact, it increased significantly (+17.20%; p = 0.03). Although it is important to note that Tc count depends on the CD4+ so a change in the proportion of CD4+, as the one that has just been discussed, could be responsible for this apparent and inconsistent increment in the proportion of Tc cells. Furthermore, conditions of this treatment were not the same as the ones in the studies carried by Fan (Fan, 2019) or Ratzer (Ratzer, 2014), as they were focused on humans instead of rats. 
As the Th population decreased more with the high dose, the same happened with the Th/Tc ratio, which is lower (by 2.26%) in the rats treated with high dose of MP (p=0.031). This result is also consistent with Brohee’s study (Brohee, 1990). 
5. 4. Gene expression of certain genes in liver
Before discussing the results from the PAGE, it is important to study the RNA purification so as to spot any possible impurities that may have tainted the subsequent results. The first indicator of RNA purity is the ratio between absorbances at 260 and 280 nm (A260/A280 ratio) as it measures the relative amount of DNA remaining in the sample (Ausubel, 2003). Control and treated samples presented ratios of 1.69 and 1.65, which are close enough to the standard for RNA purity, 1.7. Absorbance at 230 nm measures the amount of aromatic moieties such as proteins or traces of phenol. The ratio between absorbances at 260 and 230 nm (A260/A230) is thusly a proper indicator of protein contamination. Pure nucleic acids are expected to fall into the 2.0-2.2 range (Ausubel, 2003), our values were 1.22 and 0.67, which are low enough as to signify a considerable amount of protein impurity. However, as a RT-PCR was conducted before the PAGE, they should not compromise the final result provided that the PCR will increase the concentration of DNA whereas the proteinic impurities will remain unchanged. Finally absorbance at 320 nm indicates particles in the solution of dirty cuvettes (Ausubel ,2003). Our values were 0.014 and 0.039 which are insignificant.
It is safe to assume, then, that the RNA was pure enough as to not compromise any of the following results.
Moving on to the results from the PAGE, it should be noted that both negative controls gave neither clear bands nor traces of DNA, which means that there was no external contamination in them.
The studied gene expression of annexins A2 and A10 in liver tissue gave consistent results. The bands representing the DNA amplified from the primers for annexin A2 give a band at around 200 base pairs, when the sequence in between both primers covers 206 base pairs (cf. Appendix V - Section 1).
The absence of clear bands in the columns corresponding to the study of the gene expression for annexin A10 is also consistent with the characteristics of the study. If its mRNA were present in the samples, the amplified fragment should appear at 184 base pairs. However, taking into account that it has a very tissue-specific expression and can only be found in gallbladder and stomach tissues (THPA, 2020), it is consistent that there were no bands present in the gel. On the other hand, A2 has barely no tissue specificity and is expressed ubiquitously (THPA, 2020), so its expression in the liver samples was completely expected.
The resultant gel also shows presence of traces of DNA that does not correspond  to the amplified cDNA, but to genomic DNA. A way of ensuring that the presence of this genomic DNA is reduced to the bare minimum was to use primers that were separated by introns in the original DNA sequence: in the case of the PCR amplification for the cDNA correspondent to annexin A2, the forward primer hybridized with exon number 3 and the reverse one, with exon number 5, so that there were enough base pairs between them as to ensure that the duration of the extension phase prevented the amplification of genomic DNA. The PCR amplification of the cDNA correspondent to annexin A10 was carefully designed so that the forward primer hybridized in both exons 8 and 9, ensuring no amplification of genomic DNA was possible (cf. Appendix V - Section 2).
Apart from this qualitative analysis, it should be noted that there is a quite higher band intensity in bands corresponding to hepatic tissue from treated rats. Peers’ study determined that some MP treatments could induce the expression of different annexins, including A2 (Peers, 1999). However the PCR that was carried out was not quantitative, so it was incapable of differentiating initial amounts of cDNA. Therefore, this result has no significance and could be explained by external factors (e.g. not having homogenized both samples in the same way).
6. Conclusions
After five days of daily intraperitoneal injection of 40 mg/kg body weight of methylprednisolone on three female Wistar rats, most measured parameters regarding their physiological, genetic and immunological state showed no significant differences.
A steeper reduction of water intake was found in the controls compared to the treated, as well as increased blood cholesterol levels in the latter and a reduction of activated T cytotoxic cells compared to control subjects. There was not evidence to be found that would suggest that the reduction of activated Tc cells was due to the expansion of regulatory T cells as has been established in the literature.
A wider range of parameters were expected to change, regarding the immunosuppressive and hyperglycemic effects of the administered compound, but, presumably, the extent of the treatment and the reduced number of subjects of study impaired the detection of more significant changes.
7. References
Abbas AK, Lichtman AH, and Pillai S. Cellular and Molecular Immunology. 9th Edition. Philadelphia: Saunders/Elsevier, 2017.
Ausubel FM, Brent R, Kingston RE, Moore DD, Seidman JG, Smith JA, Struhl K. Current Protocols in Molecular Biology. New York; Wiley, 2003.
Ayyar VS, DuBois DC, Nakamura T. Modeling Corticosteroid Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics, Part II: Sex Differences in Methylprednisolone Pharmacokinetics and Corticosterone Suppression. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. 2019; 370(2): 327-336.
Ayyar VS, Sukumaran S, DuBois DC. Modeling Corticosteroid Pharmacogenomics and Proteomics in Rat Liver. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. 2018; 367(1): 168-183.
Bähr V, Franzen N, Oelkers W. Effect of exogenous glucocorticoid on osmotically stimulated antidiuretic hormone secretion and on water reabsorption in man. European Journal of Endocrinology. 2006; 155: 845–848.
Banuelos J, Lu NZ. A gradient of glucocorticoid sensitivity among helper T cell cytokines. Cytokine Growth Factor Reviews. 2016; 31: 27–35.
Brambilla G, Martelli A. Update on genotoxicity and carcinogenicity testing of 472 marketed pharmaceuticals. Mutation Research. 2009; 681: 209-229.
Braitch M, Harikrishnan S, Robins RA. Glucocorticoids increase CD4+CD25high cell percentage and Foxp3 expression in patients with multiple sclerosis. Acta Neurologica Scandinavica. 2009; 119(4): 239-245.
Brohee D, Vanhaeverbeek M, Kennes B. Leukocyte and lymphocyte subsets after a short pharmacological stress by intravenous epinephrine and hydrocortisone in healthy humans. International Journal of Neuroscience. 1990; 53(2-4): 53-62.
Chen X, Murakami T, Oppenheim JJ. Differential response of murine CD4+CD25+ and CD4+CD25− T cells to dexamethasone-induced cell death. European Journal of Immunology. 2004; 34: 859–69.
Christie SD, Comeau B, Myers T. Duration of lipid peroxidation after acute spinal cord injury in rats and the effect of methylprednisolone. Neurosurgical Focus. 2008; 25(5): 1-7. 
Dallman MF, LaFleur SE, Pecoraro NC. Minireview: Glucocorticoids—Food Intake, Abdominal Obesity, and Wealthy Nations in 2004. Endocrinology. 2004; 145(6): 2633 – 2638.
Davies TH, Ning YM, Sanchez ER. A new first step in activation of steroid receptors: Hormone-induced switching of FKBP51 and FKBP52 immunophilins. The Journal of Biological Chemistry. 2002; 277: 4597–4600.
Fan X, Men R, Wang H. Methylprednisolone Decreases Mitochondria-Mediated Apoptosis and Autophagy Dysfunction in Hepatocytes of Experimental Autoimmune Hepatitis Model via the Akt/mTOR Signaling. Frontiers in Pharmacology. 2019: e1189.
Food Safety Commission of Japan (FSCJ). Methylprednisolone: Summary. Food Safety. 2016; 4(2): 54-55.
Gayo A, Mozo L, Suarez A. Glucocorticoids increase IL-10 expression in multiple sclerosis patients with acute relapse. J Neuroimmunol. 1998; 85: 122–30.
Hermoso MA, Cidlowski JA. Putting the brake on inflammatory responses: The role of glucocorticoids. IUBMB Life. 2003; 55: 497–504. 
Hesterberg TW, Last JA. Ozone-induced acute pulmonary fibrosis in rats. Prevention of increased rates of collagen synthesis by methylprednisolone. The American Review of Respiratory Disease. 1981; 123(1): 47-52.
Krakoff L, Selvadurai R, Sutter E. Effect of methylprednisolone upon arterial pressure and the renin angiotensin system in the rat. American Journal of Physiology. 1975; 228(2), 613–617.
Kim TK. T test as a parametric statistic. Korean Journal of Anesthesiology. 2015; 68(6): 540-546.
Lakshmanan I, Batra SK. Protocol for Apoptosis Assay by Flow Cytometry Using Annexin V Staining Method. Bio-protocol. 2013; 3(6): e374.
Leussink VI, Jung S, Merschdorf U. High-dose methylprednisolone therapy in multiple sclerosis induces apoptosis in peripheral blood leukocytes. Archives of Neurology. 2001; 58: 91–7.
Li F, Xue ZY, Liu X. Annexin A10 contributes to chronic constrictive injury-induced pain through activating ERK1/2 signalling in rats. 2018; 128(2): 125-132.
Liu XY, Shi JH, Du WH. Glucocorticoids decrease body weight and food intake and inhibit appetite regulatory peptide expression in the hypothalamus of rats. Experimental and Therapeutic Medicine. 2011; 2(5): 977–984.
Longhi MS, Ma Y, Mitry RR, Bogdanos DP, Heneghan M, Cheeseman P, Mieli-Vergani G, Vergani D. Effect of CD4+ CD25+ regulatory T-cells on CD8 T-cell function in patients with autoimmune hepatitis. Journal of Autoimmunity. 2005; 25(1): 63-71
Mann HB, Whitney DR. On a Test of Whether one of Two Random  Variables is Stochastically Larger than the Other. Annals of Mathematical Statistics. 1947; 18(1): 50-60.
Martus R, Eloy T, Perilo R. Experimental study on the action of methylprednisolone on wistar rats before spinal cord injury. Acta Ortopédica Brasileira. 2010; 18(1): 26-30.
Mathian A, Jouenne R, Chader D. Regulatory T Cell Responses to High-Dose Methylprednisolone in Active Systemic Lupus Erythematosus. PLoS ONE. 2015; 10(12): e0143689.
McKay LI, Cidlowski JA. Physiologic and Pharmacologic Effects of Corticosteroids. In: Kufe DW, Pollock RE, Weichselbaum RR, et al., editors. Holland-Frei Cancer Medicine. 6th edition. Hamilton (ON): BC Decker; 2003. 
Migliorati G, Nicoletti I, D'Adamio F. Dexamethasone Induces Apoptosis in Mouse Natural Killer Cells and Cytotoxic T Lymphocytes. Immunology. 1994; 81 (1): 21-6.
Nandhakumar S, Parasuraman S, Shanmugam MM. Evaluation of DNA damage using single-cell gel electrophoresis (Comet Assay). Journal of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapeutics. 2011; 2(2): 107–111.
National Centre for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). PubChem: Methylprednisolone - 2D Structure. Retrieved from the NCBI website (26/01/2020): https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/6741#section=2D-Structure.
Oudega M, Vargas CG, Weber AB. Long-term efffects of methylprednisolone following transection of adult rat spinal cord. European Journal of Neuroscience. 2008; 11: 2453-2466.
Peers SH, Smillie F, Elderfield AJ, Flower RJ. Glucocorticoid - and non-glucocorticoid induction of lipocortins (annexins) 1 and 2 in rat peritoneal leucocytes in vivo. British Journal of Pharmacology. 1993; 108: 66-72.
Pountain GD, Keogan MT, Hazleman BL, Brown DL. Effects of Single Dose Compared With Three Days Prednisolone Treatment of Healthy Volunteers: Contrasting Effects on Circulating Lymphocyte Subsets. Journal of Clinical Pathology. 1993; 46(12): 1089-1092.
Pratt WB, Gehring U, Toft DO. Molecular chaperoning of steroid hormone receptors. EXS. 1996; 77:79–95.
Ratzer R, Christensen JR, Nielsen BR. Immunological effects of methylprednisolone pulse treatment in progressive multiple sclerosis. Journal of neuroimmunology. 2014; 276: 195-201.
Schroeder LL, Tang X, Wasko MCM. Glucocorticoid use is associated with increase in HDL and no change in other lipids in rheumatoid arthritis patients. Rheumatology International. 2014; 35(6). 
Seidah NG, Poirier S, Denis M. Annexin A2 is a natural extrahepatic inhibitor of the PCSK9-induced LDL receptor degradation. PLoS ONE. 2012; 7(7): e41865.
Támez-Pérez HE, Quintanilla-Flores DL, Rodríguez-Gutiérrez R. Steroid hyperglycemia: Prevalence, early detection and therapeutic recommendations: A narrative review. World Journal of Diabetes. 2015; 6(8): 1073 – 1081.
Tanaka K, Okada Y, Mori H. The Effects of Mitiglinide and Repaglinide on Postprandial Hyperglycemia in Patients Undergoing Methylprednisolone Pulse Therapy. Internal Medicine. 2018; 57: 65 - 70
The Human Protein Atlas (THPA). Tissue Atlas. Retrieved from the THPA website (24/01/2020): https://www.proteinatlas.org/humanproteome/tissue.
Thermo Scientific. Thermo Scientific ΦX174 DNA - Hae III Marker Product Information. Retrieved from the Thermo Scientific website (23/01/2020): https://www.thermofisher.com/document-connect/document-connect.html?url=https%3A%2F%2Fassets.thermofisher.com%2FTFS-Assets%2FLSG%2Fmanuals%2FMAN0012999_phiX174_DNA_BsuRI_HaeIII_Marker9_50ug_UG.pdf&title=VXNlciBHdWlkZTogcGhpWDE3NCBETkEvQnN1UkkgKEhhZUlJSSkgTWFya2VyLCA5 
Thunhorst RL, Beltz TG, Johnson AK. Glucocorticoids increase salt appetite by promoting water and sodium excretion. American Journal of Physiology-Regulatory Integrative and Comparative Physiology. 2007; 293(3): 1444–1451.
Xu J, Fan G, Chen S. Methylprednisolone inhibition of TNF-α expression and NF-kB activation after spinal cord injury in rats. Molecular Brain Research. 1998; 59(2): 135-142.
Wishart DS, Feunang YD, Guo AC. DrugBank 5.0: a major update to the DrugBank database for 2018. Nucleic Acids Research. 2017; 46(1): 1074-1082.
8. Appendixes
8. 1. Appendix I: Physiology Laboratory Protocol
1. Introduction
Methylprednisolone (MP) is a synthetic glucocorticosteroid usually prescribed as an antiinflammatory or immunosuppressive agent. It acts as an agonist for the glucocorticoid receptor modifying the transcription and protein synthesis to inhibit leukocyte infiltration, interfere with inflammatory mediators and suppress humoral immunity (Wishart, 2017). 
In rats (Rattus norvegicus), MP can also cause an increment in the systolic arterial pressure. Dosing them with 20 mg/kg body weight, the magnitude of the change can be of about 35 mmHg. (Krakoff, 1975). Furthermore, it can mess with the glycemia, the cholesterol concentration, and the haematocrit, increasing them. Based on different studies regarding treatments of Wistar rats, a common dose is around 30 mg/kg body weight (Martus, 2010; Christie, 2008).
2. Materials and reagents
Methylprednisolone 
Pentobarbital
Isoflurane
Heparin
PBS
Syringes
Scissors
Forceps
Balance
Centrifuge for Eppendorf tubes
Centrifuge for haematocrit capillary
Haematocrit capillary
Eppendorf tubes 
Reactive bands (glycemia and cholesterol)

3. Treatment with methylprednisolone
There are only 5 days available to treat the rats, so the dosage is going to be higher in order to cause a greater effect, about 40 mg/kg. Concentrations up to 50 mg/kg have been proven to be non-lethal in rats (Ayyar VS, 2018; Ayyar VS, 2019; Hesterberg TW, 1981). The biological reactives (Wistar rats) will be separated into two different groups. The first group is going to be treated with methylprednisolone as discussed; the second group, meanwhile, is going to receive injections containing PBS (Phosphate Buffered Saline) in a volume equivalent to the one administered to the treated group, and will serve as control. Control group is going to be constituted by two female rats (shared with Laboratory Subgroup 4) whilst the treated group will be composed of three female rats.
The mean weight of a rat is 250 mg which means that their approximate dosage of MP will be around 10 mg. An intraperitoneal injection should not contain more than 0.5 mL so the MP solution ought to have a concentration around 20 mg/mL. The treatment will continue for 5 days and MP will be administered to three rats. Therefore, at least 7.5 mL of MP solution will be consumed. So, in order to have enough solution as to face any unpredicted mishaps 15 mL will be prepared.
Introduce 8 mL of PBS in a suitable container.
Add 300 mg of MP.
Add PBS until volume is 15 mL.
4. Anesthetic
There is a variety of different methods and drugs that could be used to anesthetize the rats. Among them, isoflurane inhalation through facemask is the most suitable. Induction will require a concentration up to 5 %, although maintenance will only need in between 1 % and 3 % (University of Columbia, 2019). It will be used to numb the rats while performing a nick on their tails to obtain blood for the haematocrit, plasma osmolality, and cholesterol and glucose concentrations before starting with the treatment. 
It is important to get a measurement of the initial conditions of the rats so as to be able to analyse the changes that MP has caused. Alternatively, the same result could be achieved by only measuring the values at the end of the treatment when the rats are to be sacrificed and thus minimizing their stress. However, this approach will require to compare the treated animals with the controls and would assume that the difference between them is exclusively due to the treatment. Therefore, this model would not take into account the fact that every rat has inherently a different internal medium and thence would introduce a significant error into the calculation of the effects of the treatment. On the other hand, the stress caused to the rats would be minimum as they would only have a small nick on their tails barely noticeable and they would be anesthetized during the procedure. 
Hence, making the measurements before the treatment has begun and after it has ended will improve the quality and reliability of the results without causing the rats any major distress.
5. Sacrifice
Among the different options available an intraperitoneal injection of pentobarbital has been chosen as the most convenient. Pentobarbital can be used as an anesthetic although dosage must be between 40-50 mg/kg to avoid severe respiratory depression. Thus, a much higher dose (200 mg/kg) will prove to be lethal (Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 2019; University of Minnesota, 2019). 
6. Tissue collection
The effects of the treatment with MP are going to be studied from different angles and with a diverse array of methods and techniques which are described in the biochemistry, genetics, and immunology protocols. There are three tissues of special importance, namely, blood, spleen, and liver. 
6. 1. Spleen and liver collection
Spleen is going to be used in a flow cytometry (cf. Immunology Laboratory Protocol) analysis and in a comet assay (cf. Genetics Lab. Prot.). For this analysis, the whole spleen will be necessary.  On the other hand, liver tissue is necessary to analyse the difference in gene expression induced by the MP, this procedure will only require 100 mg of the liver. 
In any case, to collect both the spleen and the liver, the peritoneal cavity must be opened. 
The rat is anesthetized with a lethal dose of pentobarbital (120 mg), as described in Section 1, and placed in dorsal recumbency.
A longitudinal incision is performed through the midline on the rat’s abdominal skin. The skin flaps are pulled aside. The longitude of the incision must be of about 2 cm.
A longitudinal incision is performed through the midline on the rat’s abdominal muscle. 
Connective tissue will be cleared through blunt dissection. 
Spleen and liver can be easily identified from its entrails so they are going to be removed from their positions and samples of the aforementioned size and mass are to be cut and stored.
6. 2. Whole blood collection
Blood collection is going to be used for a haematocrit and a glycemia and cholesterol concentration test (Section 8). As has been stated, treatment with MP can alter both of them. For these tests, only a drop of blood is necessary. However, haematocrit requires a greater blood volume so it will be withdrawn directly from the heart after opening the thoracic cage. This approach can be expected to yield at least 1.5-2.0 mL.
A longitudinal incision is performed from the xiphoid through the midline. Its longitude should be of about 1.5 cm.
To the sides two incisions are made cutting through the ribs and the thoracic cavity is exposed.
The syringe is filled with heparin and then emptied. Thus, drops of heparin will remain in the walls of the syringe and in the needle and will be enough to avoid coagulation. 
Air is drawn into the syringe up to about the 0.5 mL mark to free the piston and reduce resistance within the syringe. 
The needle is carefully introduced into the heart. As soon as it is punctured, blood will rise, the volume obtained is about 1 mL. 
A gentle suction is applied with the syringe until blood flow into the syringe ceases.
Blood samples are going to be stored in darkness and will require heparin to avoid coagulation.
Note: The tissue collection has been separated into two subsections for clarity. However, the order of events will not be as described. For the first fifteen minutes after the pentobarbital injection, the heart will continue to pump blood, increasingly more slowly until it finally stops. Therefore, blood ought to be the first tissue to be collected to take advantage of the pressure generated by the heartbeat and thus maximize the volume of blood obtained. 
7. Tissue conservation
7. 1. Whole blood 
In order to avoid coagulation the syringe must be filled with heparin and then emptied before punctuating the heart. This technique ensures that small drops of heparin will be covering the walls of the syringe and the needle. Vials with blood are to be properly labeled in order to distinguish those that come from individuals treated with MP from those who belong to the control group. Part of the blood will be used immediately to calculate the glycemia, and the cholesterol concentration. The remaining blood will be used to calculate the haematocrit and to measure the osmolality of its plasma.
7. 2. Liver
Liver has to be frozen in situ with liquid nitrogen and kept in a refrigerator at -72 ºC until needed. Samples are to be properly labeled so as to distinguish those that come from individuals treated with MP from those who belong to the control group. 
7. 3. Spleen
In contrast, spleen is to be kept fresh in a PBS (pH = 7.4) solution. To prevent bacterial growth, antibiotics ought to be added. The specific antibiotics and their concentration depend on the resources available and therefore are still to be determined. Samples are to be properly labeled so as to distinguish those that come from individuals treated with MP from those who belong to the control group.
8. Daily treatment
Everyday food and water intakes are going to be measured and registered along with the weight of the animal. Three of the four animals available are going to receive daily an intraperitoneal injection of MP. The last one, along with another rat from Subgroup 4, will constitute the control group and will receive an intraperitoneal PBS injection of 0.5 mL. Thence, treatment and measurements from the control group will be shared between Subgroups 4 and 5. The MP injection will contain the appropriate volume of the MP solution and will be adjusted according to the weight of the animal. It is probably going to be necessary two people: one to immobilized the animal and the other to inject the drug. 
9. Complementary measurements
9. 1. Haematocrit determination
A certain amount of the blood previously collected will be centrifuged in a capillary at 12,000 xg, which in the equipment available corresponds to 10,000 rpm, for 10 minutes. Finally, they will be 3 different phases: 1) plasma, 2) white blood cells (leukocytes) and 3) red blood cells (erythrocytes). The haematocrit level will be calculated by measuring with a ruler the total amount of liquid and the erythrocyte phase. Then the measurements will be introduced in the following equation (University of Granada, 2019):
H=EL100
9. 2. Glycemia and cholesterol determination
The remaining blood will be then centrifuged at 2,500 rpm for 15 min in order to obtain plasma samples. Glycemia and cholesterol determination tests will only require a few drops. Reactive bands will give us an approximate value of the glucose and cholesterol concentrations in the plasma. Glucose can also be measured with a glucometer. Both will be measured before beginning the treatment and at its end. Therefore, before administering the first MP dose, some blood will be obtained by nicking the end of the tails and the plasma will be isolated by centrifuging the samples (Pickering, 2014; Roche Diagnostics, 2019). 
9. 3. Plasma osmolality determination
Plasma osmolality will be measured using a Wescor osmometer (vapor pressure osmometry). 10 μl of plasma are enough for this assay. The measurement time will take about 80 seconds (Wescor Inc., 2004). In order to observe the effects of MP in the rat, this assay will be performed twice, at the beginning of the treatment and at the end. The procedure to load samples is included in the manual given by the manufacturer.
10. Bibliography
AAT Bioquest Incorporated. Buffer Preparations. Retrieved from the AAT Bioquest Inc. website (11/12/2019): https://www.aatbio.com/resources/buffer -preparations-and-recipes/pbs-phosphate-buffered-saline.
Albert Einstein College of Medicine. Recommended Methods of Anesthesia, Analgesia, and Euthanasia for Laboratory Animal Species. Retrieved from the Albert Einstein College of Medicine website (11/12/2019): https://www.einstein.yu.edu/ uploadedFiles/administration/animal-studies/ANES%20ANAL%20EUTH%20%20TABLE%202014.pdf.
Ayyar VS, DuBois DC, Nakamura T, Almon RR, Jusko WJ. Modeling Corticosteroid Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics, Part II: Sex Differences in Methylprednisolone Pharmacokinetics and Corticosterone Suppression. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. 2019; 370(2): 327-336.
Ayyar VS, Sukumaran S, DuBois DC, Almon RR, Jusko WJ. Modeling Corticosteroid Pharmacogenomics and Proteomics in Rat Liver. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. 2018; 367(1): 168-183.
Christie SD, Comeau B, Myers T, Sadi D, Purdy M,  Mendez I. Duration of lipid peroxidation after acute spinal cord injury in rats and the effect of methylprednisolone. Neurosurgical Focus. 2008; 25(5): 1-7. 
Hesterberg TW, Last JA. Ozone-induced acute pulmonary fibrosis in rats. Prevention of increased rates of collagen synthesis by methylprednisolone. The American Review of Respiratory Disease. 1981; 123(1): 47-52.
Krakoff L, Selvadurai R, Sutter E. Effect of methylprednisolone upon arterial pressure and the renin angiotensin system in the rat. American Journal of Physiology. 1975; 228(2), 613–617.
Martus R, Eloy T, Perilo R. Experimental study on the action of methylprednisolone on wistar rats before spinal cord injury. Acta Ortopédica Brasileira. 2010; 18(1): 26-30.
Pickering D, Mardset J. How to measure blood glucose. Community Eye Health. 2014; 27(87): 56-57.
Roche Diagnostics. Prospecto Accutrend Colesterol 25 Tiras. Retrieved from the RapidControl website (14/12/2019): https://www.rapidcontrol.es/_resources/pdf/pros pecto_accutrend_coleste rol25_tiras.pdf.
Wishart DS, Feunang YD, Guo AC. DrugBank 5.0: a major update to the DrugBank database for 2018. Nucleic Acids Research. 2017; 46(1): 1074-1082.
University of Granada. Hematocrito. Retrieved from the University of Granada website (13/12/2019): https://www.ugr.es/~jhuertas/EvaluacionFisiologica/Hematocrito /hemat.htm.
University of British Columbia. Rodent Anesthesia Guideline. Retrieved from the University of Columbia website (11/12/2019): https://animalcare.ubc.ca/sites/default /files/documents/Guideline%20-%20Rodent%20Anesthesia%20Analgesia%20Formulary%20%282016%29.pdf.
University of Minnesota. Anesthesia Guidelines: Rats. Retrieved from the University of Minnesota website (11/12/2019): https://www.researchserv ices.umn.edu/services-name/research-animal-resources/research-support/guidelines/anesthesia-rats.
Wescor Incorporated. Vapro®: Vapor Pressure Osmometer Model 5520 User’s Manual. Wescor Inc. United States of America, 2004.



8. 2. Appendix II: Immunology Laboratory Protocol
1. Mechanical disaggregation of rat spleen cells
The whole spleen will have been collected from three rats treated with methylprednisolone (MP) and two controls that will have not been treated (cf. Physiology Laboratory Protocol). These spleens will have been kept fresh in a PBS solution with antibiotics (cf. Phys. Lab. Prot. Subsection 7.3). 
Mechanical disaggregation of the spleen can be conducted by pressing it repeatedly with the plunger end of a syringe over a Petri dish, previously removing the adipose and connective tissue. Then, the cells ought to be resuspended in a PBS solution (1M, pH 7.4) in a total volume of 10 mL.
2. Isolation of leukocytes by density gradient
2. 1. Introduction  
The Ficoll-Hypaque method will be used to isolate mononuclear blood cells from the disaggregated  spleen sample. Fundamentally, this technique separates the sample into three phases allowing the extraction of the mononuclear cells, given that they have a lower density than the rest of cells present in the spleen. The procedure will follow the indications described by McCoy (McCoy, 1998).
2. 2. Materials
15 and 50 mL-conical centrifuge tubes
Centrifuge
Pasteur Pipettes (sterile)
2. 3. Reagents
1.077 g/mL Ficoll-Hypaque 
Spleen cells suspension (cf. Section 1)
Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)
2. 4. Procedure
With a sterile pipet, place the Ficoll-Hypaque solution into a 50 mL-conical centrifuge tube, using 1 volume of Ficoll-Hypaque (4 mL) per 2 volumes of cellular suspension (8 mL).
Slowly layer the diluted cellular suspension over the Ficoll-Hypaque solution by gently pipetting it down the side of the tube containing the Ficoll-Hypaque. 
Centrifuge 30 minutes at 400 xg which corresponds approximately to 1500 rpm in the equipment available. Temperature must be kept at 21 ºC. The brake should be removed as to avoid destroying the interphase due to the sudden stop.
Using a sterile Pasteur pipet, proceed to carefully remove the mononuclear cells, located at the interface. Contact between the cells and the Ficoll-Hypaque (bottom layer) should be minimized to avoid damaging them.
Transfer the aspirated mononuclear cells to a 15 mL-conical tube. Add 10 mL of PBS. Centrifug 5 minutes at 1500 rpm and 18-20 ℃.
Discard the supernatant and repeat wash with PBS.
Mix 90 µL of PBS with 10 µL of the solution of cells in order to dilute it so that the counting in the Neubauer chamber is easier.
3. Cell counting in haemocytometer (Neubauer chamber) 
3. 1. Introduction
Methylprednisolone is prescribed as an immunosuppressant. To verify whether MP generates genotoxicity in the spleen a comet assay will be performed (cf. Genetics Lab. Prot. Section 1). For this analysis, the cellular concentration ought to be approximately 100,000 cells/30 μL. The original concentration of the sample will be measured using a Neubauer chamber (its method of use is described below) and then it will be diluted as required for obtaining the proper concentration. The indications of the manufacturer EMS will be followed (EMS, 2019).
3. 2. Materials
Cellular dilution to measure
Neubauer chamber
Optical microscope
Cover glass
Pipette/Micropipette with disposable tips
Dilution buffer/PBS 
3. 3. Procedure
Introduce 10 µL of the sample into the Neubauer chamber.
Set up the microscope and focus the field of vision. Look for the first counting grid square where the cell count will start. Start counting the cells thence. "Cells touching the upper and left limits should be counted, whilst cells touching the lower and right limits should not be taken into account." Write down the number of cells counted in the first square. Repeat the process for the remaining squares, writing down the counting results from 8 of them from two different regions of the chamber. 
Calculate the concentration applying the following formula: Concentration (cell/mL = Number of cells / Volume (in mL).
Note: The number of cells will be the sum of all the counted cells in all squares counted. Since the volume of 1 big square is: 0.1 cm x 0.1 cm = 0.01 cm2 of area counted. Since the depth of the chamber is 0.1 mm: 0.1 mm = 0.01 cm; 0.01 cm2 x 0,01 cm = 0.0001 cm3 = 0.0001mL= 0.1 µL. The length of the side of each square is 0.25 mm and the dilution is 1:10. Thus, for the Neubauer chamber, the formula used when counting in the big squares is: Concentration (cells/µL)= Mean of cells in each square / 0.252 x 0.1 x 0.1.
Results
Control: 7.25 per square → 11600 cells/µL
Rat I: 1.625 per square → 2600 cells/µL
Rat II: 2.375 per square → 3800 cells/µL
Rat III: 1.625 per square → 2600 cells/µL
The volume that should be extracted from each tube is calculated using the following formula: Vi=3.5·106cells/mL · 2 mLCi
After extracting the necessary volume, it must be taken into account that the final volume should be 2 mL, which means that the solutions corresponding to rats I and III need to be resuspended as to extract the supernatant and fill with 2 mL of PBS.
4. Phenotypic and quantitative analysis of lymphocyte subpopulations (Acquisition and analysis by flow cytometry)
4. 1. Introduction
Flow cytometry is a technique based primarily on the detection of light signals, mainly fluorescent. In this case, the cellular suspension will be exposed to antibodies marked with a fluorophore. Then the system will separate the cells according to which markers they have attached (Álvarez, 2018). There are three different parameters that will be studied: 1) cell phenotype, 2) cell activation, and 3) apoptotic/healthy cells ratio.
To measure the cell phenotype three antibodies will be used, namely, anti-CD3, anti-CD4 and anti-CD25. All of them are membrane receptors specific to certain lymphocyte phenotypes. CD3 is the transducing domain of the TCR and thus is only present on T cells. CD4 is a membrane receptor that is only expressed on T helper lymphocytes (Th). Finally, CD45 is a B cell membrane receptor (Abbas, 2015). 
Hence, if a certain cell is double positive for CD3 and CD4 it will be a T helper; if it is positive for CD3 and negative for CD4 that would mean it is a cytotoxic T lymphocyte; and if it is negative for CD3 and positive for CD45 it will be a B cell.
On the other hand, to measure the cell activation an anti-CD25 antibody will be used. CD25 is a membrane receptor whose expression is induced after lymphocyte activation. Thus it will serve as a differential marker for activated cells. Its main function is recognition of interleukin 2 (IL2) which signals cell proliferation (Abbas, 2015). This analysis will be particularly interesting given that the rats will have been treated with MP, which is an immunosuppressant (cf. Phys. Lab. Prot. Section 1).
To conclude, the rate between healthy and apoptotic cells will act as an indicator of toxicity. The rats will be given a high dose of an immunosuppressant and it could cause damage to the spleen (Lakshmanan, 2013). 
4. 2. Parameters
4. 2. 1. Cell Phenotype
As has been stated, the markers used to identify the different subpopulations of lymphocytes are CD3 and CD4; CD45 will not be used given the lack of relevance in the quantity of B cells. Potentially, CD8 could also be used to select the cytotoxic T cells. However, in order to facilitate the analysis, CD8 will not be a target for the monoclonal antibodies.
The antibodies ought to be conjugated to a fluorophore so as to be recognised by the flow cytometer. Menon’s method will be followed for the study, although adapted to the specific necessities of the current analyses (Menon, 2014).
4. 2. 1. 1. Materials
Flow cytometer (BD FACSCanto II)
Microcentrifuge
4. 2. 1. 2. Reagents
PBS
FBS (Fetal Bovine Serum)
Fluorophore-conjugated antibodies
mAb mouse anti-rat CD3-APC (Immunostep). Stock: 0.2 μg/μl. Working dilution 0.4 μg/test (106 cells)
mAb mouse anti-rat CD4-PE (Immunostep). Stock: 0.2 μg/μl. Working dilution 0.25 μg/test (106 cells)
4. 2. 1. 3. Procedure
Add 100 µL of cell suspension to each tube.
Add 1 µL of each solution of fluorophore-conjugated antibodies (anti-CD3 and anti-CD4) against the previously mentioned clusters to the sample at an appropriate dilution (provided by the manufacturer).
Incubate for 30 minutes in the dark at 4 ℃.
Add 2 mL of flow buffer (2% FBS (fetal bovine serum) in PBS) to the tubes. Centrifuge at 380 xg (≈ 1,600 rpm) for 5 minutes at 4 °C. Discard the supernatant leaving the pellet behind.
After the second wash, decant the supernatant and re-suspend the cells in flow buffer to a final volume of 200 µL.
Use sample for flow cytometric analysis.


4. 2. 2. Cell Activation
The study of activated cells should be carried out through the recognition of the CD25 marker. However, there is  a disadvantage: given that the treatment will only last 5 days, its effect on the expression of CD25 in immune cells could be meager and hence it may not be detected. Therefore, an early marker of lymphocyte activation would be needed. Hence, CD69 will be used given that it participates in the differentiation of regulatory T cells, among other processes (Cibrian, 2017).
The method for studying the amount of activated cells is the same as the one used for cell phenotypes: adding a monoclonal antibody against CD25 (mAb mouse anti-rat CD25-FITC (Immunostep). Stock: 0.5 μg/μl. Working dilution 1 μg/test (106 cells)) or CD69 conjugated to a fluorophore and carrying out a flow cytometry. Thus, reagents, materials and procedure will be the same as in the previous subsection, the only significant difference will be the antibodies employed.
4. 2. 3. Apoptotic/Healthy cells rate
The basis of this assay is the hydrophobicity of cells due to the phosphatidyl serine that they express in their inner membrane. When cells undergo apoptosis, the inner membrane flips to become the outer membrane, exposing phosphatidylserine, which is detected by Annexin V. Propidium iodide stains the necrotic cells, which have leaky DNA content that help to differentiate the apoptotic and necrotic cells. Lakshmanan’s method will be followed adapted to the present study (Lakshmanan, 2013).
4. 2. 3. 1. Materials
Flow cytometer (BD FACSCanto II)
Centrifuge
4. 2. 3. 2. Reagents
Annexin V 
Propidium iodide
PBS buffer (pH 7.4, 1 M): NaCl, KCl, Na2HPO4, KH2PO4


4. 2. 3. 3. Procedure
This procedure is equivalent to the one described above for the analysis of cell phenotype and activation (cf. Section 4. 2. 1. 3.), with the only variation of step 2, in which the reagents for this assay are added to the mixture.
Add 100 µL of cell suspension (concentration of 1 x 106 viable cells/mL by adding the appropriate volume of flow buffer or PBS with 0.1% BSA) to each tube.
Incubate for 30 minutes in the dark.
Add 2 mL of flow buffer (2% FBS (fetal bovine serum) in PBS) to the tubes. Centrifuge at 380 xg (≈ 1,600 rpm) for 5 minutes at 4 °C. Discard the supernatant leaving the pellet behind.
After the second wash, decant the supernatant and re-suspend the cells in flow buffer to a final volume of 200 µL.
Add 10 µL of propidium iodide to each tube.
Use sample for flow cytometric analysis.
Cells that were propidium iodide (PI) negative and Annexin V negative are considered healthy, PI negative and Annexin V positive cells are considered apoptotic, and cells that are both positive for PI and Annexin V will then be considered necrotic.
For all these essays (cell phenotype, cell activation and apoptotic/healthy cells ratio), samples will be studied in three different tubes: a) one just with cells (negative control), b) one with cells and monoclonal marked antibodies (positive control) and c) one for the apoptosis essay.
4. 2. 4. Detection of TCR mutant cells (T cell receptor) 
These cells are CD3- CD4+. The procedure carried out is the same as in the previous analyses (Subsections 4. 2. 1 and 4. 2. 2), although using monoclonal antibodies against CD3 and CD4 marked with fluorophores (Kyoizumi, 2005; Menon, 2014). This data will be processed during the Genetics Laboratory practices (cf. Gen. Lab. Prot. Section 2).


4. 2. 4. Estimation of mutation frequencies
To estimate the mutation frequencies a simple equation can be used, subtracting the non mutant cells (CD3+) from the total of cells (CD4+) and dividing it by this total.
M=CD4+CD3-CD4+
5. Bibliography
Abbas AK, Lichtman AH, Pillai S. Inmunología celular y molecular. Elsevier España, S.L.U. 8th  Edition, 2015.
Álvarez L, González A, Magadán S, Ramírez N, Reche PA, de los Toyos JR, Ybarra G. Inmunotecnología y sus aplicaciones. Oviedo; Ediciones de la Universidad de Oviedo, 2018.
Cibrián D, Sánchez-Madrid F. CD69: From Activation Marker to Metabolic Gatekeeper. European Journal of Immunology. 2017; 47(6): 946-953.
Electron Microscopy Sciences (EMS). Neubauer Haemocytometry Catalog Numbers 68052-14, 68052-15. Retrieved from the EMS website (12/12/2019): https://www.emsdiasum.com/mic roscopy/technical/datasheet/68052-14.aspx 
Kyoizumi S, Kusunoki Y, Hayashi T. Flow Cytometric Measurement of Mutant T Cells With Altered Expression of TCR: Detecting Somatic Mutations in Humans and Mice. Methods in Molecular Biology. 2005; 291: 197-204
Lakshmanan I, Batra SK. Protocol for Apoptosis Assay by Flow Cytometry Using Annexin V Staining Method. Bio-protocol 2013; 3(6): e374
McCoy J. Handling Storage and Preparation of Human Blood Cells. Current Protocols in Cytometry. 1998; 00(1): 5.1.1-5.1.13.
Menon V, Thomas R, Ghale AR. Flow Cytometry Protocols for Surface and Intracellular Antigen Analyses of Neural Cell Types. Journal of Visualized Experiments. 2014; 94: 52241.



8. 3. Appendix III: Genetics Laboratory Protocol
1. Analysis of genetic instability in vivo, using the comet assay with spleen lymphocytes obtained from treated and untreated individuals
1.1. Introduction
Comet assay is a simple, cheap, and effective technique to measure different kinds of DNA damage like single and double strand breaks, apurinic and apyrimidinic sites, DNA cross-links, base and base-pair damages, and apoptotic nuclei. Cells are going to be embedded in agarose and then treated with a hypertonic lysis solution and with a non-ionic detergent so as to remove their cell membranes, cytoplasm, nucleoplasm, and to dissolve nucleosomes. Then, they are to be treated with a high alkaline solution to expose alkali labile sites (apurinic and apyrimidinic sites) which will appear as breaks. Such breaks migrate towards the anode when exposed to current during electrophoresis thereby producing a ‘comet’-like appearance, hence the name of the assay (Nandhakumar, 2011).
This study will use spleen tissue samples from three rats treated with methylprednisolone (MP) and one that was not treated (cf. Physiology Laboratory Protocol). The main objective of this analysis is to verify whether treatment with MP causes genotoxicity in the spleen. The samples will have a cellular concentration of 100,000 cells/30 μL (cf. Immunology Lab. Prot. Section 3). The procedure will follow the instructions described by Azqueta and Collins adapted to the current study (Azqueta, 2014). The final results that are to be obtained represent the percentage of tail DNA for each cell.
1. 2. Preparation of reagents
Solution for pre-coating slides 
0.5 % NMP agarose (25 mg of normal melting point agarose in 5 mL of sterile MiliQ water). In order to dissolve the agarose, the mixture will be introduced in the microwave for around two minutes.
Agarose for embedding cells
1 % LMP agarose (50 mg of low melting point agarose in 5 mL of sterile MiliQ water). In order to dissolve the agarose, the mixture will be introduced in the microwave for around two minutes.
Neutralization buffer (200 mL per team) 
Weigh 9.69 g of Tris and dissolve it in 200 mL of distilled water. Adjust pH to 7.5 with 1 M HCl. Autoclave the solution and store it at room temperature.
The concentration of this solution is 0.4 M Tris. 
Lysis solution (200 mL)
Stock solution
The concentration of this solution is NaCl 2.5 M, EDTA 100 mM and Tris 10 mM. Preparation:
Add 100 mL of double-distilled water
29.22 g of NaCl
7.44 g of disodium EDTA 
0.24 g of Tris
Set pH to 10 with NaOH 
Adjust the final volume to 200 mL with double-distilled water.
Filter the solution and store it at room temperature. 
Before using the solution, sterilize it in the autoclave
Working solution
Just before adding the solution during the procedure, pour 2 mL of Triton X-100 (making it ≃ 1% Triton X-100). Cool it in a refrigerator (4 ºC) for 40-60 min prior to use. It is recommended to prepare fresh working lysis solution. As the whole procedure will only last one week, the solution will not be stored as Stock solution but as Working solution to avoid waiting times.
Electrophoresis (denaturing) buffer (2.5 L)
Stock Solution I: 5 M NaOH
Stock Solution II: 100 mM EDTA
Working solution
Take 120 mL of Stock Solution I and 20 mL of Stock Solution II, mix and adjust the volume to 2 L with cold double-distilled water. The pH should be ≃ 13.
Reagents for fluorescent staining with ethidium bromide
The stock solution is 0.2 mg/mL ethidium bromide.
The working solution is 0.5 μg/mL ethidium bromide.
The final solution that will be applied to the slides will contain 1 μL of Vectashield©️ and 40 μL of ethidium bromide per slide.
1. 3. Procedure
In this analysis, 8 gels will be run.
1. 3. 1. Slide preparation
Dissolve the 0.5 % NMP agarose and keep it in a water bath until it reaches 55 ºC.
Pour 150 μL of this solution on every slide and spread it with the finger gently until it covers all its surface.
1. 3. 2. Embedding cells in agarose
Melt the 1 % LMP agarose solution in the microwave and place it in a water bath of 37 ºC.
Mix 30 μL of cell suspension (100,000 cells) with 60 μL of 1 % LMP agarose solution to obtain a final concentration of agarose at 0.67 % and pipette the mix up and down once.
Place the mixture on the pre-coated slide.
Add cover slips to the slides to spread this second layer.
Leave the gels at 4 ºC for them to solidify.
After solidifying, remove the cover slips, observing if there is any humidity on them corresponding to liquid agarose
1. 3. 3. Lysis
Place the slides in the lysis solution in a staining jar.
Leave at 4 ºC in darkness for at least 1 hour.
1. 3. 4. Denaturing.
Place the slides in the electrophoresis tank and add cold electrophoresis solution to cover the slides. The reason why it needs to be cold is to avoid overheating during the electrophoresis. The slides will be organized as shown in Figure 1, where the grey areas represent the frozen part of the slides, without any space between them and filling the columns completely, with bare slides if necessary. 

Figure 1.. Scheme of the organization of the slides in the electrophoresis tank (prepared by the authors).
Incubate for 20 minutes at 4 ºC.
1. 3. 5. Electrophoresis
Connect the electrophoresis tank to the power supply and set the voltage at 0.83 V/cm, without exceeding 300 mA to avoid overheating. The intensity of the current must be controlled by adding the appropriate volume of electrophoresis buffer to the chamber.
Run the electrophoresis for about 20 minutes.
Note: Always use cold electrophoresis buffer or perform electrophoresis under refrigeration to avoid DNA damage due to heat generated during current flow.

1. 3. 6. Neutralization
Wash the slides with 60 mL of neutralization buffer, leaving them for 5 minutes in a Coplin jar. 
Repeat the previous step twice more.
1. 3. 7. Fixation and staining
Add ethanol to the slides and leave for 3 to 5 minutes at room temperature.
Remove the slides from the ethanol and let them dry until the next day.
Place the staining solution onto each slide and cover them with a clean cover slip. Before viewing the slides, excess stain from the back and edges of the slides should be blotted away. 
The percentage of tail DNA will be measured using a computer program, specifically Komet 5©.
2. Analysis of genetic instability in vivo using TCR (T cell receptor) gene mutation assay in the lymphocytes analysed by flow cytometry
2. 1. Introduction
 Flow cytometry is going to be used in order to identify T cells with a TCR gene mutation. CD3 is a transmembrane protein whose main function is the transduction of signals from the TCR, thereby in case of mutations in the TCR it will be altered. On the other hand, CD4 is a membrane receptor specific of T helper lymphocytes (Th). The procedure will use monoclonal antibodies against CD3 and CD4 marked with fluorophores (Kyoizumi, 2005). Therefore, TCR mutants will be CD3- CD4+ whereas normal Th cells will be both CD3+ and CD4+. The experimental protocol has been described in the Imm. Lab. Prot. (Subsection 4.2.1.3) and follows the instructions described by Menon (Menon, 2014) and it will be also transcribed here:
2. 2. Procedure
Add 100 µL of cell suspension (concentration of 1 x 106 viable cells/mL by adding the appropriate volume of flow buffer or PBS with 0.1% BSA) to each tube.
Add fluorophore-conjugated antibodies against the previously mentioned clusters to the sample at an appropriate dilution (provided by the manufacturer).
Incubate for 30 minutes in the dark.
Add 1 mL of flow buffer (2% FBS (fetal bovine serum) in PBS) to the tubes. Centrifuge at 380 xg (≈ 1,700 rpm) for 4 minutes at 4 °C. Discard the supernatant leaving the pellet behind.
Repeat the wash step again.
After the second wash, decant the supernatant and re-suspend the cells in flow buffer to a final volume of 200 µL.
Use sample for flow cytometric analysis.
2. 3. Estimation of mutation frequencies
To estimate the mutation frequencies a simple equation can be used, dividing the total of mutant cells (CD3- CD4+) by the total of CD4+ cells:
M=CD3-CD4+CD3+CD4+ + CD3-CD4+
3. Bibliography
Azqueta A, Collins AR. The Comet Assay: High Throughput Use of FPG. In: Sierra LM and Gaivao I, editors. Genotoxicity and DNA Repair: A Practical Approach. NY: Springer Protocols; 2014. p. 199-218.
Kyoizumi S, Kusunoki Y, Hayashi T. Flow Cytometric Measurement of Mutant T Cells With Altered Expression of TCR: Detecting Somatic Mutations in Humans and Mice. Methods in Molecular Biology. 2005; 291: 197-204.
Menon V, Thomas R, Ghale AR. Flow Cytometry Protocols for Surface and Intracellular Antigen Analyses of Neural Cell Types. Journal of Visualized Experiments. 2014; 94: 52241.
Nandhakumar S, Parasuraman S, Shanmugam MM. Evaluation of DNA damage using single-cell gel electrophoresis (Comet Assay). Journal of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapeutics. 2011; 2(2): 107–111.
8. 4.  Appendix IV: Biochemistry Laboratory Protocol
1. Rat liver extraction from treated and control animals. Preservation of RNA integrity by keeping tissue in appropriately safe storage conditions
The extraction of 100 mg of rat liver and its conservation have already been detailed in Subsections 6.1 and 7.2 of the Physiology Laboratory Protocol while the treatment to which the rats will have been submitted is described in Sections 3 and 8. 
2. Purification of total RNA from liver tissue sample 
2. 1. Introduction
Purification of total RNA from the liver tissue sample (Phys. Lab. Prot. Subsections 6.1 and 7.2) will be achieved using an improved version of the Chomczynski and Sacchi’s single-step method for total RNA isolation (Chomczynski, 1987; Chomczynski, 1993). The reagent that will be used is known as TRI Reagent®, and is commercialized by Sigma-Aldrich (Sigma-Aldrich, 2019b).
It is important to note that RNA purification can be difficult to perform properly because the human body secretes RNAses through the skin (Wang, 2017) and RNA is generally more unstable than DNA (Šponer, 2018). Thereby, all the equipment and reagents used must be sterile and contaminations ought to be avoided, or at least minimized, to prevent RNA degradation. Sterilization will be achieved by submerging all the materials in a 0.1 M NaOH solution and then, subsequently washing them with ultra-pure water several times so as to eliminate all traces of RNAses.
2. 1. Reagents
Chloroform, Catalog Number C2432
2-Propanol, Catalog Number I9516
75% Ethanol
1 mM sodium phosphate, Catalog Number S3264, pH 8.2, 0.5% SDS solution, Catalog Number L4522
TRI Reagent® Sigma-Aldrich, Catalog Number T9424



2. 2. Procedure
2. 2. 1. Sample preparation
Disrupt the frozen tissue samples with a glass rod and homogenize them in TRI Reagent® (1 mL per 100 mg of tissue) in an appropriate homogenizer.
2. 2. 2. Phase Separation
To ensure complete dissociation of nucleoprotein complexes, allow samples to stand for 5 minutes at room temperature. Add 0.2 mL of chloroform per mL of TRI Reagent® used. Cover the sample tightly, shake vigorously for 15 seconds, and allow to stand for 2–15 minutes at room temperature. Centrifuge the resulting mixture at 12,000xg for 15 minutes at 2-8 °C. Centrifugation separates the mixture into 3 phases: 
Red organic phase (containing protein)
Interphase (containing DNA)
Colorless upper aqueous phase (containing RNA)
2. 2. 3. RNA isolation
Transfer the aqueous phase to a fresh tube and add 0.6 volumes (considering as one volume the one obtained in the aqueous phase) of 2-propanol and mix. Allow the sample to stand for 5–10 minutes at room temperature. 
Centrifuge at 12,000 xg for 10 minutes at 2-8 °C. The RNA precipitate will form a pellet on the side and bottom of the tube.
Note: Interphase and organic phase can be discarded.
Remove the supernatant and wash the RNA pellet by adding a minimum of 1 mL of 75% ethanol per 1 mL of TRI Reagent® used in Sample Preparation, step 1. Centrifuge at 12,000 xg for 5 minutes at 2-8 °C.
Notes:
a. If the RNA pellets float, repeat both the wash in 75% ethanol and the centrifugation at 12,000 xg.
b. Samples can be stored in ethanol at 2-8 °C for at least 1 week.
Briefly dry the RNA pellet for 5–10 minutes by airdrying in the oven at 37 °C. Do not let the RNA pellet dry completely, as this will greatly decrease its solubility. Do not dry the RNA pellet by centrifugation under vacuum (Speed-VacÒ).
Add an appropriate volume of deionized freezing water (30 μL) to the RNA pellet in order to resuspend it.
2. 2. 4. Quantification of RNA purification
2 μL of the solution prepared in the previous subsection is diluted in 198 μL of ultrapure water.
The absorption is measured using a spectrophotometer at 260 nm and 280 nm. If the sample has been properly purified the ratio A260 /A280 should be equal or greater than 1.7. 
Absorbance at 325 nm indicates particulates in the solution or dirty cuvettes; contaminants containing peptide bonds or aromatic moieties such as protein and phenol absorb at 230 nm (Ausubel, 2003).
The concentration of the sample is determined through Lambert-Beer’s law. Molar extinction coefficient for RNA at 260 nm is 0.025 mL μg-1cm-1(Ausubel, 2003).
3. Complementary DNA synthesis (cDNA) by reverse transcription of the RNA obtained from rat liver, for both, treated and control animals 
3. 1. Introduction
Synthesis of cDNA can be achieved by using a retrotranscriptase. In this study, Thermo Scientific™ RevertAid™ H Minus Reverse Transcriptase (RT) will be used. It is a genetically modified Moloney Murine Leukemia Virus (M-MuLV) RT, that lacks RNAse H activity and therefore can not degrade RNA in RNA-DNA duplex during synthesis of the first strand cDNA and thus produces high yields of full-length cDNA from long templates. The procedure will follow the recommendations provided by the manufacturer (Thermo Scientific, 2019).
All the materials used must be treated so as to be sterile and nuclease free to avoid RNA degradation as aforementioned. 
3. 2. Reagents
Template RNA (cf. Section 2)
Oligo(dT)18, Catalog Number SO131
Ultrapure Water
5X Reaction Buffer
dNTP Mix 10 mM each, Catalog Number R0191
Thermo Scientific™ RiboLock™, Catalog Number EO0381
RevertAid H Minus Reverse Transcriptase  
3. 3. Procedure for first strand DNA synthesis:
Add into sterile, nuclease-free tube on ice in the indicated order:
Template RNA
total RNA
5 μg*
Primer
Oligo(dT)18 (#SO131)
1 μL (100 pmol)
Ultrapure Water
to 12.5 μL

*The volume of the solution of RNA used depends on its concentration which will be determined after its purification. In any case, it has to amount to the mass described on the table.
Incubate the mixture at 65 ℃ for 5 minutes, centrifuge briefly and place the tube in ice.
Add the following components in the indicated order:
5X Reaction Buffer
4 μL
Thermo Scientific™ RiboLock™ RNase Inhibitor (#EO0381)
0.5 μL (20 U)
dNTP Mix, 10 mM each (#R0191)
2 μL (1 mM final concentration)
RevertAid H Minus Reverse Transcriptase
1 μL (200 U)
Total volume
20 μL

Mix gently and centrifuge briefly.
Incubate 60 minutes at 42 °C.
Terminate the reaction by heating at 70 °C for 10 minutes.
Notes:
a. The reverse transcription reaction product can be directly used in PCR or stored at -20 °C.
b. Use 1 μL of the reaction mix to perform PCR in 25 μL volume.
4. Specific cDNA amplification, by PCR, of some of the selected transcripts present in the rat liver transcriptome 
4. 1. Introduction
cDNA amplification will be achieved by using a DNA polymerase from Thermus aquaticus (Taq) and expressed in Escherichia coli that has been commercialized by Sigma-Aldrich. This polymerase is thermostable and can withstand repeated heating to 95 ºC without significant loss of activity. Specificity can be obtained using primers for the PCR (Polymerase Chain Reaction) appropriate for the genes of interest. The procedure will follow the recommendations provided by the manufacturer (Sigma-Aldrich, 2019b).
All the materials used must be treated so as to be sterile and nuclease free to avoid RNA degradation.
4. 2. Reagents
Taq DNA Polymerase, Catalog No. D6677 5 units/mL in 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 100 mM KCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, stabilizers, 50 % glycerol
10 x PCR Buffer without MgCl2, Catalog No. P2317, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.3, 500 mM KCl
Magnesium chloride solution, 25 mM, Catalog No. M8787
Deoxynucleotide Mix, Catalog No. D7295 containing 10 mM dATP, dCTP, dGTP, TTP
Water, PCR Reagent, Catalog No. W1754
Thermal cycler
Primers (10 μM each)
cDNA (cf. Section 3)
4. 3. Procedure:
Add the following reagents to a 200 or 500 μL microcentrifuge tube in the following order:
Amount
Component
16 µL
Water
2.5 µL
10X PCR Buffer
2.5 µL
25 mM MgCl2
0.5 µL
10 mM dNTPs
1 µL
Forward primer (typically 15-30 bases in length)
1 µL
Reverse primer (typically 15-30 bases in length)
0.5 µL
Taq DNA Polymerase
1 µL
Template DNA 
25 µL
Final volume

Label three tubes for each one of the studied genes: one with the cDNA from the control sample, another with the cDNA from the treated sample and a last one without DNA to be used as a blank. 
Briefly centrifuge to collect all components to the bottom of the tube.
Typical cycling parameters (30 cycles of amplification are recommended):
Denature the template → 94 °C 30 seconds
Anneal primers → 52 °C 30 seconds
Extension → 72 °C 20 seconds
The final cycle (cycle number 31) will have only one step of 2 minutes at 72 ℃.
The amplified DNA can be evaluated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and subsequent ethidium bromide staining.
5. Detection of transcript presence by electrophoretic analysis of the amplified product from each sample and imaging documentation of the obtained results (PAGE with EtBr)
5. 1. Introduction
Analysis of the amplified cDNA will show differences in the expression of certain genes between the livers of treated and non-treated rates. Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (PAGE) will show bands corresponding to each of the genes of interest. When the bands are marked with Ethidium Bromide, the difference in the intensity of their fluorescence can be used as an indicator of the difference in concentration and therefore as indicator of their different expression.
The procedure will follow the indications described in the textbook Molecular Cloning: a Laboratory Manual (Sambrook, 2012).
5. 2. Materials
Vertical electrophoresis chamber with power supply, glass plates, spacers and combs
5. 3. Reagents
30 % polyacrylamide solution (filter through 0.45 mM filter and store in the dark at 4°C): 
29 g Acrylamide
1 g Bis-acrylamide
100 mL double-distilled water
10 % Ammonium persulfate solution 
TEMED
Electrophoresis buffer: 1X TBE  prepared in distilled water: 
89 mM Tris (pH 7.6)
89 mM boric acid 
2 mM EDTA
5X gel loading buffer:
80% glycerol 75% 
Bromophenol blue (B5525) 0.25%
Xylene cyanol (X4126) 0.25%
1M Tris (pH 7.4) 10 mM
5 M NaCl 10 mM
0.5 M EDTA 10 mM
10% SDS 0.1%
Ethidium bromide 0.5 µg/mL
Transilluminator
IMPORTANT: Acrylamide and bis-acrylamide are neurotoxic in nature. All the steps should be performed wearing powder-free gloves.
5. 4. Procedure
Clean the glass plates and spacers of the gel casting unit with deionized water and ethanol.
Assemble the plates with the spacers on a stable surface.
Prepare gel solution using the following volumes (for 12 mL) depending on the percentage of gel required. Two gels are going to be prepared. Their concentration will be 7% acrylamide and their composition ought to be the following:
9.5 mL water
4 mL (30% acrylamide + 0.8% bisacrylamide)
1.5 mL 10X Tris Borate EDTA buffer (TBE)
280 μL (10% ammonium persulfate, APS)
12 μL TEMED (Tetramethylethylenediamine)*
*TEMED must be the last ingredient added. As soon as it is incorporated, polymerization will begin.
Pour the gel solution in the plates assembled with spacers. Insert the comb immediately ensuring no air bubbles are trapped in the gel or near the wells. Allow the gel to set for about 30-60 minutes at room temperature.
When ready to perform electrophoresis, mount the plates with gel in the apparatus and fill the chambers with 1X TBE buffer. It is recommended to perform a pre-run for about 10 minutes at 5 V/cm.
Prepare the samples by mixing 10 µL of sample with 5 µL of 5X gel loading buffer. Load the samples carefully into the wells without introducing any air bubbles.
Large gels may be run at 200 V for 45 minutes or until the dye front approaches the bottom of the gel. Ensure that there is no excessive heating.
Pry open the glass plates with a spatula, separate the upper glass plate. Stain the gel while still attached to the lower glass plate with 0.5 µg/mL ethidium bromide solution for 5 – 10 minutes.
Wrap the gel and plate in plastic wrap, invert onto UV transilluminator and acquire the image of the gel.
The samples will appear as bright bands.
6. Bibliography
Ausubel FM, Brent R, Kingston RE, Moore DD, Seidman JG, Smith JA, Struhl K. Current Protocols in Molecular Biology. New York; Wiley, 2003.
Chomczynski P. A reagent for the single-step simultaneous isolation of RNA, DNA and proteins from cell and tissue samples. Biotechniques. 1993; 15(3): 532-534, 536-537.
Chomczynski P, Sacchi N. Single-Step Method of RNA Isolation by Acid Guanidinium Thiocyanate-Phenol-Chloroform Extraction. Analytical Biochemistry. 1987; 162: 156-159.
Sambrook J, Fritsch EF, Maniatis T. Molecular Cloning: a laboratory manual 4th Edition. Cold Spring Harbor, New York; Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 2012.
Sigma-Aldrich. Taq DNA Polymerase Catalog Number D4545 Technical Bulletin. Retrieved from the Sigma-Aldrich website (11/12/2019): https://www.sigmaaldrich .com/content/dam/sigma-aldrich/docs/Sigma/Bulletin/d4545bul.pdf.
Sigma-Aldrich. TRI Reagent® Catalog Number T9424 Technical Bulletin. Retrieved from the Sigma-Aldrich website (11/12/2019): https://www.sigmaaldrich. com/content/dam/sigma-aldrich/docs/Sigma/Bulletin/t9424bul.pdf.
Šponer J, Bussi G, Krepl M, Banáš P, Bottaro S, Cunha RA, et al. RNA Structural Dynamics as Captured by Molecular Simulations: A Comprehensive Overview. Chemical Reviews. 2018; 118(8): 4177-4338.
Thermo Scientific. Thermo Scientific RevertAid H Minus Reverse Transcriptase Product Information. Retrieved from the Thermo Scientific website (11/12/2019): https://assets.thermofisher.com/TFS-Assets/LSG/manuals/MAN0012886_RevertAid_H_Minus_Reverse_Transcript_ep0451_UG.pdf.
Wang B. Human Skin RNases Offer Dual Protection against Invading Bacteria. Frontiers in Microbiology. 2017; 8:624.

















8. 5. Appendix V: PCR Primer Design
1. PCR primers and amplified mRNA
>NM_019905.1 Rattus norvegicus annexin A2 (Anxa2), mRNA
AGGCTCTCTGCAATAGGTGCCCGGCCCAGCTTTTTTTTCAAAATGTCTACTGTCCACGAAATCCTGTGCAAGCTCAGCTTGGAGGGTGATCATTCTACACCCCCAAGTGCCTATGGGTCGGTCAAACCCTACACCAACTTCGACGCTGAGAGGGATGCTTTGAACATTGAAACAGCAATCAAGACCAAAGGCGTGGACGAGGTCACCATTGTCAACATTCTGACTAACCGCAGCAATGCACAGAGGCAGGACATTGCCTTCGCCTACCAGAGGAGGACCAAAAAGGAACTGCCATCGGCGATGAAGTCGGCCTTGTCTGGTCACCTGGAGACCGTGATGTTAGGCCTGTTGAAGACACCTGCTCAGTACGATGCCTCTGAGCTCAAAGCCTCCATGAAGGGCCTGGGGACTGATGAGGACTCCCTCATCGAGATCATCTGCTCAAGAACCAACCAGGAGCTGCAGGAGATTAACCGAGTGTATAAGGAAATGTACAAGACCGATCTGGAGAAGGACATCATCTCTGACACATCTGGAGAATTCCGAAAGCTGTTGGTCGCCCTTGCAAAGGGTAAACGGGCAGAGGATGGTTCTGTTATTGACTACGAGCTGATTGACCAGGATGCCCGGGAGCTCTATGATGCTGGGGTGAAGAGGAAAGGAACCGATGTCCCCAAGTGGATCAGCATCATGACTGAGCGCAGTGTGTGCCACCTCCAGAAAGTGTTCGAAAGGTACAAGAGCTACAGTCCTTATGACATGCTGGAGAGCATCAGGAAAGAGGTCAAAGGAGACCTGGAGAACGCCTTCCTGAACCTGGTTCAGTGCATTCAGAACAAGCCCCTGTACTTTGCTGACCGGCTGTATGACTCCATGAAGGGCAAGGGGACTCGAGACAAGGTCCTGATTAGAATCATGGTCTCTCGCAGTGAAGTGGACATGTTGAAAATCAGATCTGAATTCAAGAGGAAATATGGCAAATCCCTGTACTACTTCATCCAGCAAGACACTAAGGGTGACTACCAGAAGGCGCTGCTGTACCTGTGTGGTGGGGACGACTGAAGGGCTTGGCATGGTGGATTGCCCAGAAGTGGCCCTACCTGTGCCCCAACCTAATGTTCTAGAGAATCAGCCTGCCACTAATGGACCCCTGAACTCCTCCCTGTGAAGATGACGACAGAGCTGCCGACCCATCCCCCATCTTAGCTGCCTTTGCCTGGCTTTCCCCTCATTCTCTCCTTTATGCCAAAGAAATGAACATTCCAGGGAGTTGGACGTACCGTCTGTGACATGAGACACTTCCTCATATGTGTCGTGAATAAACCATTTTTACTTTAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
>NM_001109110.1 Rattus norvegicus annexin A10 (Anxa10), mRNA
TCCTGATTTGCTTCTGTATTTTCTTGCCTGAGATACTTGGTCAGGCAGACATATTTAAATTTGGAACTGTAGGGAACCTCAGCCACTTTGGCCTCACAGGGAACAACTCTGTGAAGTAGGACCCTGACTGAAATCCTTGTGATCTACCCTGGTTACTTCCTCTCTTCAAAATGTTCTGTGGGGAATATGTCCAAGGAACCATCTTCCCAGCTCCAAATTTCAATCCCATGATGGATGCCCAAGTGATAGATGGAGCACTCCAAGGATTTGAATGCAATAAAGACCTGTTGATCGACATCCTAACACAACGCAGCAATGCTCAGCGGCAGATGATAGCTGGGACCTATCAGAGCATGTACGGCAGGGACCTGATTGCAGATCTGAAGGAGCAACTTTCATCTCACTTCAAAGAAGTGATGGTGGGCCTGATGTATCCACCACCATCTTACGATGCTCATGAGCTGTGGCATGCCATGAAGGGAGCAGGAACTGATGAGAATTGCCTCATTGAAATATTAGCTTCGAGAACAAATGGGGAGATTTTCCAGATGCGAGAAGCCTACTGTTTACAATACAGCAATAACCTTCAAGAGGACATTTATTCAGAGACATCGGGACACTTCCGAGATACTCTTATGAACTTGGTCCAGGGAAACAGGGAGGAAGGCTACACTGACCCTGCAATGGCTGCTCAGGATGCAATGGTGCTGTGGGAAGCCTGCCAGCAGAAGACTGGGGAACATAAAACCATGCTGCAGATGATCCTGTGCAACAAGAGCTACCCACAACTTTGGCTGATTTTCCAGGAATTTCAAACTATTTCTGGCCAAGACCTGGTGGATACTATCAGTGACTGTTACGATGGTTACTTCCAGGAGCTACTGATTGCAATTGTTCGTTGTGTTCAGGACAAACCAAGCTACTTTGCTTATAAATTATACAGGGCAATCCATGATTTTGGCTTCCATAACAAAACTGTCATCAGGATTCTAATCGCCAGAAGTGAAATAGATCTAATGACCATAAGGAAACGTTACAAGGAGAGATTCGGAAAATCCCTCTTTCATGATATCAAAAGTTTTGCTTCAGGGCACTATAAGAAAGCATTGCTTGCCATCTGCGCCGGTGATGTGGAAGACTATTAAAAAGAGGGAGGGTTTGAAGATGATGGAATCCTCTTTATAGACACCAGATATAGACGGCTGAACGTGTGCTGTCATTGACACTGAAACAAAACTATAAAATCATATCTTCTTATATCTCTACAATTATTCTGAGACAAAAATAAATCTACTATTGAAAATATGTAATCCTGGATTTGTAGCCCTTATTCAATTAGTAA
2. Gene structure
>Anxa2 annexin A2 [Rattus norvegicus (Norway rat)]
AACTTCGACGCTGAGAGGGATGCTTTGAACATTGAAACAGCAATCAAGACCAAAGGTAGGCCATGCGCCTTGTCAAGGCTTCTCCTTGTCAGGGTGGCCTTAAACTCATAATGTAGCCC..........GAGTATATGGATTCCACTGTGTGAAAGTCGCCTAAAGTGTGTGGTGGGGTAACTCTTCACGACTTGATTCCCCACAGGCGTGGACGAGGTCACCATTGTCAACATTCTGACTAACCGCAGCAATGCACAGAGGCAGGACATTGCCTTCGCCTACCAGAGGAGGACCAAAAAGGTACTGGAACCTTAGGGTGGAGGGCAAGCGTTGCTGAGTCAGTGTCCTCAGATATCGCCTGTT..........CACAGCCTGCTTTTTAGATAAAGCCATCGTTTTTCTGTCTTGCTGGCTCTAGAGTGGATGCTGGTTCCAAGTGACTCTTAGACATCTCCCTTTTGCAGGAACTGCCATCGGCGATGAAGTCGGCCTTGTCTGGTCACCTGGAGACCGTGATGTT
The sequence of annexin A2 amplified by the previously described primers (yellow) would include exons 3, 4 and 5 (red) and introns 3 and 4 (green) of genomic DNA.
>Anxa2 annexin A10 [Rattus norvegicus (Norway rat)]
CCACAACTTTGGCTGAGTAACTAGAAACAGGCTCTTTCCAACTCTTTAACCAATTGAATGACATACAAGT..........ATGAAAATCCCATTCAAATCACATCAATTTCTTGAAGTTTTCCAGGAATTTCAAACTATTTCTGGCCAAGACCTGGTGGATACTATCAGTGACTGTTACGATGGTTACTTCCAGGAGCTACTGATTGCAATTGGTAAGCTGGATTTCATATGATGAACAGCCAACCTTGCCTTTCACAGCACTGAATGGCTCTGACTAGA..........CTCAATTTCTTTCCCGACTTCCGAAGAATTACATCCTGTCACTCAAATTTTTCCTTGCTCTCTTCCTCTCTAGTTCGTTGTGTTCAGGACAAACCAAGCTACTTTGCTTATAAATTATACAGGGCAATCCATGTAAGTATAACACATACTTTTTTAACTTATTTAAAATTAATATCTACTATTTTTATTCCAAAGAAAAT..........GGACCCACAAGCAAATCGCTACTGAGAAGGAAGCCCTTCCATGCTGAACAGGTCTTAAAGTACTGTTTTCTCTACCCACATTTCTGCTGTTTTTAGGATTTTGGCTT
The sequence of annexin A10 amplified by the previously described primers (yellow) would include exons 8, 9, 10 and 11 (red) and introns 8, 9 and 10 (green) of genomic DNA.
8. 6. Appendix VI: Mann-Whitney U test results
Mann-Whitney U test only can be applied to compare two groups, so in this appendix there are all the results for the p-values obtained for all the possible combinations of samples.
Control group
Control 1 - Control 2: 0.119
Treated group
Treated 1 - Treated 2: 0.489
Treated 2 - Treated 3: 0.624
Treated 1 - Treated 3: 0.750
Comparison between groups
Control 1 - Treated 1: 0.025
Control 1 - Treated 2: 0.141
Control 1 - Treated 3: 0.052
Control 2 - Treated 1: 0.479
Control 2 - Treated 2: 0.987
Control 2 - Treated 3: 0.653













8. 7. Appendix VII: Immunology Data from Low Dose of Methylprednisolone (Subgroup 4)
The data was shared by the subgroup 4 (David Cordero, Natalia Cuervo, Patricia del Campo, and Daniel Fabriani) who has treated both the rats and the samples following the same protocols as the present study, but with a daily dose of 20 mg/kg body weight of intraperitoneal methylprednisolone. This information will only be used to discuss and contextualize the results in Subsection 5.3. In Table 1 they are included the means of the rats treated with low dose and the ones from rats treated with high doses. 


Viable cells
T-cells
Th
Tc
Th25+
Th25h
Th25l
Tc25+
Th/Tc
TCR
IP
Low Dose
46.25
25.51
78.14
19.95
4.06
1.64
2.50
0.743
4.03
21.51
9.38
High Dose
47.35
34.60
61.83
37.15
4.90
1.15
3.87
1.275
1.77
17.03
4.09
p-value
0.876
0.303
0.035
0.030
0.625
0.551
0.266
0.339
0.031
0.565
0.170
Significance
NS
NS
S
S
NS
NS
NS
NS
S
S
NS
Change
1.10
9.09
-16.32
17.20
0.837
-0.495
1.37
0.532
-2.26
-4.49
-5.30

Table 1. Comparison between data for low and high doses of methylprednisolone. p-values were calculated with Student’s t-test, α = 0.05. All the values are percentages related to the number of T-cells except the Viable cells values that depend on the total number of cells, and TCR values that depend on the T helper count.  Code: S, significant change; NS, non-significant change; Th, T helper cells; Tc, T cytotoxic cells; Th25+, CD25+ Th cells; Th25h, regulatory T cells; Th25l, activated T cells; Tc25+, activated Tc cells; Th/Tc, Th-Tc ratio; TCR, proportion of TCR mutated T-cells; and IP, apoptotic cells.